CHAPTER 3
USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION
SECTION 301
GENERAL

301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall control the classification of all buildings and structures as to use and occupancy.
SECTION 302
CLASSIFICATION

302.1 General. Structures or portions of structures shall be classified with respect to occupancy in one or more of the groups listed in this section. A room or space that is intended to be occupied at different times for different purposes shall comply with all of the requirements that are applicable to each of the purposes for which the room or space will be occupied. Structures with multiple occupancies or uses shall comply with Section 508. Where a structure is proposed for a purpose that is not specifically provided for in this code, such structure shall be classified in the group that the occupancy most nearly resembles, according to the fire safety and relative hazard involved.
1.
Assembly (see Section 303): Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4 and A-5

2.
Business (see Section 304): Group B

3.
Educational (see Section 305): Group E

4.
Factory and Industrial (see Section 306): Groups F-1 and F-2

5.
High Hazard (see Section 307): Groups H-1, H-2, H3, H-4 and H-5

6.
Institutional (see Section 308): Groups I-1, I-2, I-2.1, I-3 and I-4

7.
Laboratory (see Section 202): Group B, unless classified as Group L (see Section 443) or Group H (see Section 307).

8.
Mercantile (see Section 309): Group M

9.
[SFM] Organized Camps (see Section 440): Group C.


10.
[SFM] Research Laboratories (see Section 443): Group L

11.
Residential (see Section 310): Groups R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4

12.
Storage (see Section 311): Groups S-1 and S-2

13.
Utility and Miscellaneous (see Section 312): Group U [SFM] Existing buildings housing existing protective social


care homes or facilities established prior to 1972 (see Section 3413).
302.1.1 Reserved
302.1.2 Reserved
302.1.3 Pharmacies; veterinary facilities; barbering, cosmetology or electrolysis establishments; and acupuncture offices. See Chapter 12.
SECTION 303
ASSEMBLY GROUP A


303.1 Assembly Group A. Assembly Group A occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for the gathering of persons for purposes such as civic, social or religious functions; recreation, food or drink consumption or awaiting transportation; motion picture and television production studio sound stages, approved production facilities and production locations; or for the showing of motion pictures when an admission fee is charged and when such building or structure is open to the public and has a capacity of 10 or more persons.
303.1.1 Small buildings and tenant spaces. A building or tenant space used for assembly purposes with an occupant load of less than 50 persons shall be classified as a Group B occupancy.
303.1.2 Small assembly spaces. The following rooms and spaces shall not be classified as Assembly occupancies:
1.
 A room or space used for assembly purposes with an occupant load of less than 50 persons and accessory to another occupancy shall be classified as a Group B occupancy or as part of that occupancy.

2.
A room or space used for assembly purposes that is less than 750 square feet (70 m2) in area and accessory to another occupancy shall be classified as a Group B occupancy or as part of that occupancy.


303.1.3 Associated with Group E occupancies. A room or space used for assembly purposes that is associated with a Group E occupancy is not considered a separate occupancy.
303.1.4 Accessory to places of religious worship.
Accessory religious educational rooms and religious auditoriums with occupant loads of less than 100 are not considered separate occupancies.

303.2 Assembly Group A-1. Assembly uses, usually with fixed seating, intended for the production and viewing of the performing arts or motion pictures including, but not limited to:
Motion picture and television production studio sound stages, approved production facilities and production locations. (with live audiences).
Motion picture theaters
Symphony and concert halls
Television and radio studios admitting an audience
Theaters


303.3 Assembly Group A-2. Assembly uses intended for food and/or drink consumption including, but not limited to:
Banquet halls
Casinos (gaming areas)
Nightclubs
Restaurants, cafeterias and similar dining facilities

(including associated commercial kitchens)
Taverns and bars


2013 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE 	JULY 1, 2015 ERRATA
BUFF
USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION
303.4 Assembly Group A-3. Assembly uses intended for worship, recreation or amusement and other assembly uses not classified elsewhere in Group A including, but not limited to:
Amusement arcades Art galleries Bowling alleys Community halls Courtrooms Dance halls (not including food or drink consumption) Exhibition halls Funeral parlors Gymnasiums (without spectator seating) Indoor swimming pools (without spectator seating) Indoor tennis courts (without spectator seating) Lecture halls Libraries Museums Places of religious worship Pool and billiard parlors Waiting areas in transportation terminals
303.5 Assembly Group A-4. Assembly uses intended for viewing of indoor sporting events and activities with spectator seating including, but not limited to:
Arenas
Skating rinks
Swimming pools
Tennis courts

303.6 Assembly Group A-5. Assembly uses intended for participation in or viewing outdoor activities including, but not limited to:
Amusement park structures
Bleachers
Grandstands
Stadiums

303.7 Fixed guideway transit systems. [SFM] Fixed guide-way transit system buildings shall conform to the requirements of this code for their occupancy classification in addition to the provisions set forth in Section 433.
303.8 Subterranean spaces for winery facilities in natural or manmade caves. [SFM] For fire and life safety requirements, see Section 436.
SECTION 304
BUSINESS GROUP B

304.1 Business Group B. Business Group B occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for office, professional or service-type transactions, including storage of records and accounts. Business occupancies shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Airport traffic control towers
Ambulatory care facilities serving five or fewer patients (see Section 308.4.2 for facilities serving more than five patients)
Animal hospitals, kennels and pounds
Banks
Barber and beauty shops

Car wash Civic administration Clinic, outpatient [SFM] (not classified as Group I-2.1) Dry cleaning and laundries: pick-up and delivery stations
and self-service Educational occupancies for students above the 12th grade Electronic data processing Laboratories: testing, research and [SFM] instruction Motor vehicle showrooms Post offices Print shops Professional services (architects, attorneys, dentists,
physicians, engineers, etc.) Radio and television stations Telephone exchanges Training and skill development not within a school or
academic program (this shall include, but not be limited to, tutoring centers, martial arts studios, gymnastics, and similar uses regardless of the ages served, and where not classified as a Group A occupancy)
304.2 Definitions. The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY.
CLINIC, OUTPATIENT.
SECTION 305
EDUCATIONAL GROUP E


305.1 Educational Group E. Educational Group E occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, by more than six persons at any one time for educational purposes through the 12th grade.
Exception: [SFM] A residence used as a home school for the children who normally reside at the residence. Such residences shall remain classified as Group R-2, or Group R-3 occupancies.
305.1.1 Accessory to places of religious worship. Religious educational rooms and religious auditoriums, which are accessory to places of religious worship in accordance with Section 303.1.4 and have occupant loads of less than 100, shall be classified as Group A-3 occupancies.
305.2 Group E, day care facilities. This group includes buildings and structures or portions thereof occupied by more than six children 2 years of age and older who receive educational, supervision or personal care services for fewer than 24 hours per day.
Exception: [SFM] A Day-care facility not otherwise classified as an R-3 occupancy, where occupants are not capable of responding to an emergency situation without physical assistance from the staff shall be classified as Group I-4.
SECTION 306
FACTORY GROUP F


306.1 Factory Industrial Group F. Factory Industrial Group F occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for assembling, disassembling,
BUFF



I

>

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

of noncombustible materials which during finishing, packing or processing do not involve a significant fire hazard shall be classified as F-2 occupancies and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Beverages: up to and including 16-percent alcohol content Brick and masonry Ceramic products Foundries Glass products Gypsum Ice Metal products (fabrication and assembly)
SECTION 307
HIGH-HAZARD GROUP H


[F] 307.1 High-hazard Group H. High-hazard Group H occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, that involves the manufacturing, processing, generation or storage of materials that constitute a physical or health hazard in quantities in excess of those allowed in control areas complying with Section 414, based on the maximum allowable quantity limits for control areas set forth in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2). Hazardous occupancies are classified in Groups H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 and shall be in accordance with this section, the requirements of Section 415 and the California Fire Code. Hazardous materials stored, or used on top of roofs or canopies shall be classified as outdoor storage or use and shall comply with the California Fire Code.
Exceptions: The following shall not be classified as Group H, but shall be classified as the occupancy that they most nearly resemble.
1 . 	Buildings and structures occupied for the application of flammable finishes, provided that such buildings or areas conform to the requirements of Section 416 and the California Fire Code.
2. 	Wholesale and retail sales and storage of flammable and combustible liquids in mercantile occupancies conforming to the California Fire Code.
3 . 	Closed piping system containing flammable or combustible liquids or gases utilized for the operation of machinery or equipment.
4.
Cleaning establishments that utilize combustible liquid solvents having a flash point of 140F (60C) or higher in closed systems employing equipment listed by an approved testing agency, provided that this occupancy is separated from all other areas of the building by 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or 1hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

5.
Cleaning establishments that utilize a liquid solvent having a flash point at or above 200F (93C).

6.
Liquor stores and distributors without bulk storage.

7.
Refrigeration systems.




fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, repair or processing operations that are not classified as a Group H hazardous or Group S storage occupancy.
306.2 Moderate-hazard factory industrial, Group F-1.
Factory industrial uses which are not classified as Factory Industrial F-2 Low Hazard shall be classified as F-1 Moderate Hazard and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Aircraft (manufacturing, not to include repair)
Appliances
Athletic equipment
Automobiles and other motor vehicles
Bakeries
Beverages: over 16-percent alcohol content
Bicycles
Boats
Brooms or brushes
Business machines
Cameras and photo equipment
Canvas or similar fabric
Carpets and rugs (includes cleaning)
Clothing
Construction and agricultural machinery
Disinfectants
Dry cleaning and dyeing
Electric generation plants
Electronics
Engines (including rebuilding)
Food processing and commercial kitchens not associated
with restaurants, cafeterias and similar dining facilities
Furniture
Hemp products
Jute products
Laundries
Leather products
Machinery
Metals
Millwork (sash and door)
[SFM] Motion picture and television production studio Sound Stages, Approved Production Facilities and production locations (without live audiences)
Musical instruments
Optical goods
Paper mills or products
Photographic film
Plastic products
Printing or publishing
Recreational vehicles
Refuse incineration
Shoes
Soaps and detergents
Textiles
Tobacco
Trailers
Upholstering
Wood; distillation
Woodworking (cabinet)
306.3 Low-hazard factory industrial, Group F -2. Factory industrial uses that involve the fabrication or manufacturing
2013 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

8.
The storage or utilization of materials for agricultural purposes on the premises.

9.
Stationary batteries utilized for facility emergency power, uninterruptable power supply or telecommunication facilities, provided that the batteries are provided with safety venting caps  and ventilation is provided in accordance with the California Mechanical Code.

10.
Corrosives shall not include personal or household products in their original packaging used in retail display or commonly used building materials.



11 . 	Buildings and structures occupied for aerosol storage 'shall be classified as Group S-1, provided that such buildings conform to the requirements of the
California Fire Code.
12. 	Display and storage of nonflammable solid and
nonflammable or noncombustible liquid hazardous materials in quantities not exceeding the maximum allowable quantity per control area in Group M or S occupanCies complying with Section 414.2.5.

13.
The storage of black powder, smokeless propellant and small arms primers in Groups M and R-3 and special industrial explosive devices in Groups B, F, M and S, provided such storage conforms to the quantity limits and requirements prescribed in the


California Fire Code.
14. [SFM] Group L occupancies as defined in section
443. 1.
[F]
307.1.1 Hazardous materials. Hazardous materials in any quantity shall conform to the requirements of this code, including Section 414, and the California Fire Code.

[F]
307.2 Def"mitions. The following terms are defmed in Chapter 2:


AEROSOL. Level l aerosol products. Level 2 aerosol products. Level 3 aerosol products.

AEROSOL CONTAINER.
BALED COTTON.
BALED COTTON, DENSELY PACKED.
BARRICADE.

Artificial barricade.
Natural barricade. BOILING POINT. CLOSED SYSTEM. COMBUSTffiLE DUST. COMBUSTffiLE FmERS. COMBUSTffiLE LIQUID.
Class II.
Class IliA.
Class rrm.




COMPRESSED GAS. CONTROL AREA. CORROSIVE. CRYOGENIC FLUID. DAY BOX. DEFLAGRATION. DETONATION. DISPENSING. EXPLOSION. EXPLOSIVE.

High explosive.
Low explosive.
Mass-detonating explosives.
UN/DOTn Class 1 explosives.

Division 1.1.
Division 1.2.
Division 1.3.
Division 1.4.
Division 1.5.
Division 1.6.

FIREWORKS. Fireworks, 1.3G. Fireworks, 1.4G.
FLAMMABLE GAS. FLAMMABLE LIQUEFIED GAS. FLAMMABLE LIQUID.
Class lA.
Class m.
Class iC.

FLAMMABLE MATERIAL.
FLAMMABLE SOLID.
FLASH POINT.
HANDLING.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
HEALTH HAZARD.
mGHL Y TOXIC.
INCOMPATffiLE MATERIALS.
INERT GAS.
OPEN SYSTEM.
OPERATING BUILDING.
ORGANIC PEROXIDE.

Class I.
Class II.
Class ill.

2013 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE





USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

Class IV.
Class V.
Unclassified detonable.

0
OXIDIZER.
Class 4.
Class 3.
Class 2.

Class 1.
OXIDIZING GAS.
PHYSICAL HAZARD.
0 PYROPHORIC.
PYROTECHNIC COMPOSITION.
TOXIC.
UNSTABLE (REACTIVE) MATERIAL.
Class 4.

Class 3.
Class 2.
Class 1.

WATER-REACTIVE MATERIAL.
Class 3.
Class 2.
Class 1.

[F] 307.3 High-hazard Group H-1. Buildings and structures containing materials that pose a detonation hazard shall be classified as Group H-1. Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Detonable pyrophoric materials
Explosives:
Division 1.1
Division 1.2
Division 1.3


[F] TABLE 307.1(1)
np

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREA OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS POSING A PHYSICAL HAZARD.J,m, ,
GROUP  STORAGE"  USE-CLOSED SYSTEMS"  USE-OPEN SYSTEMS"
MATERIAL  CLASS  WHEN THE MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY IS EXCEEDED  Solid pounds (cubic feet)  Liquid gallons (pounds)  Gas (cubic feet at NTP)  Solid pounds (cubic feet)  Liquid gallons (pounds)  Gas (cubic feet atNTP)  Solid pounds (cubic feet)  Liquid gallons (pounds)

0  Co mbustible dust Co mbustible liquidc, i  NIA n lllA lliB  H-2 H-2 or H-3 H-2 or H-3 N/A  Note q NIA  N/A 120d,e 330d,e 13,200e,f  NIA NIA  Note q NIA  N/A 120d 330d 13,200f  NIA NIA  Note q NIA  NIA 30d 80d 3,300f
Combustible fiber  Loose Baled0  H-3  (100) (1,000)  NIA  N/A  (100) (1,000)  N/A  NIA  (20) (200)  NIA
Consumer fireworks  1.4G  H-3  125d,e,l  NIA  NIA  N/A  N/A  NIA  NIA  N/A

Cryogenics, NIA H-2 NIA 45d N/A N/A 45d N/A NIA 10d
flammable Cryogenics, inert N/A N/A NIA NIA NL N/A N/A NL NIA N/A
NIA N/A
45d
N/A NIA 45d N/A NIA 10dCryogenics,

oxidizing
Division 1.1 H-1 1e,g (l)e,g NIA 0.25g (0.25)g NIA 0.25g (0.25)g 1e,g
Division 1.2
0.25g (0.25)g NIA 0.25g

H-1 NIA
(1)e, g (0.25)g  g NIA p (V NIA 1g (1)g (SO)g
so (S)
Division 1.3 H-1 or H-2
 g (SO)e.g NIA sog 125d,e,
Division 1.4 NIA N/A NIAExplosives H-3
l
Division 1.4G NIA N/A N/A N/A N/A NIA N/AH-3
Division 1.5 H-1 1e,g (l)e,g NIA 0.25g (0.25)g NIA 0.25g (0.25)g Division 1.6 H-1 1d,e,g N/A N/A NIA NIA N/A NIA N/A
Gaseous N/A 1,00 N/A 1,000d.e
Flammable gas H-2 N/A NIA NIA N/A
Liquefied (150)d,e N/A (150)d,e N/A 30d,e
1A H-2 30d 10d
Flammable liquidc NIA NIA N/A NIA NIA
1B and 1C or H-3 120d,e 120d 30d
Flammable liquid,
H-2
co mbination N/A N/A 120d,e,h N/A N/A 120d,h N/A N/A 30d,h
LJ
or H-3
(1A, lB, 1C)
(continued)
2013 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION
[F] TABLE 307.1(1)-(continued)
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREA OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS POSING A PHYSICAL HAZARD"' m, n, P

GROUP STORAGE" USE-CLOSED SYSTEMS" USE-OPEN SYSTEMS" WHEN THE
Solid Solid Solid
MATERIAL

MAXIMUM Liquid Gas Liquid Gas
LiquidCLASS

pounds 	pounds pounds
ALLOWABLE gallons (cubic feet gallons (cubic feet gallons
(cubic (cubic 	(cubic
QUANTITY IS (pounds) at NTP) (pounds) at NTP)
(pounds)

feet) 	feet) feet)EXCEEDED
Flammable solid N/A H-3 12Sd, e N/A N/A 12Sd N/A N/A 2Sd
N/A

Gaseous
N/A N/A N/A NL N/A N/A NL N/A N/A
Inert gas Liquefied
N/A N/A N/A NL N/A N/A NL N/A N/A
UD
H-1 10, 8 (1)0, 8 N/A 0.2S8 (0.2S)8 N/A 0.25g
(0.2S)8
(1)d

I
H-2 Sd, e (S)d, e N/A 1d cv N/A 1d
IT
H-3 sod, e (SO)d, e N/A sod csw N/A 10d ClWOrganic peroxide
Ill
12Sd, e (12S)d, e
12Sd (12S)d
NL
2Sd
(2S)d
NL

N/A N/A
N NL NL NL NL
N/A N/A
N/A N/A
N/A

NL NL NL NL
NL
NL

v
N/A
0
0


Oxidizer Oxidizing gas Pyrophoric material Unstable (reactive)
Water reactive
4
H-1 10, 8 (1)  8 N/A 0.2S8 (0.2S)8 N/A 0.2Sg
(0.2S)g

3k
(2)d

H-2 or H-3 10d, e ClW  N/A 2d (2)d N/A 2d
(SO)d

2
H-3 2SOd, e (2SO)d, e N/A 2SOd (2SO)d N/A sod
1
N/A 4,oooe. r (4,000)0' f N/A 4,ooor (4,000)f N/A 1,ooor
(1,000)r

Gaseous
N/A N/A 1,SOOd,e N/A N/A 1,sood. NIA
N/A

H-3 (1SO)d,e 	(1SO)d,e
Liquefied
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
N/A

N/A
H-2 4e, g (4)e, g so g 18 (1)g 108 0
0

4
H-1 l " g (l)e, g lOg 0.2Sg (0.2S)g 2e,g 0.2Sg
(0.2S)g
(1)d

3
H-1 or H-2 sd, e (S)d, e sod, e 1d (1)d 10d, e 1d
(lO)d

2
H-3 SOd, e (SO)d, e 2SOd, e sod csw 2SOd, e 10d
1
N/A NL NL NL NL NL NL NL
NL
(1)d

3
H-2 Sd, e (S)d, e N/A sd (S)d N/A 1d
(lO)d

2
H-3 SOd, e (SO)d, e N/A sod (SO)d N/A lOd
0
1
N/A NL NL N/A NL NL N/A NL
NL


For SI: 1 cubic foot = 0.028 m3, 1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 gallon = 3.785 L.NL = Not Limited; N/A = Not Applicable; UD = Unclassified Detonable
a.
For use of control areas, see Section 414.2.

b.
The aggregate quantity in use and storage shall not exceed the quantity listed for storage.

c.
The quantities of alcoholic beverages in retail and wholesale sales occupancies shall not be limited provided the liquids are packaged in individual containers not exceeding 1.3 gallons. In retail and wholesale sales occupancies, the quantities of medicines, foodstuffs, consumer or industrial products, and cosmetics containing not more than 50 percent by volume of water-miscible liquids with the remainder of the solutions not being flanunable, shall not be limited, provided that such materials are packaged in individual containers not exceeding 1.3 gallons.

d.
[SFM] In other than Group L occupancies, maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Where Note e also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.

e.
[SFM] In other than Group L occupancies, maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent when stored in approved storage cabinets, day boxes, gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures or in listed safety cans in accordance with Section 5003.9. 10 of the California Fire Code. Where Note d also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.

f.
The permitted quantities shall not be limited in a building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

g.
Permitted only in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.


0
h.
Containing not more than the maximum allowable quantity per control area of Class lA, m or IC flanunable liquids.

i.
The maximum allowable quantity shall not apply to fuel oil storage complying with Section 603.3.2 of the California Fire Code.

j.
Quantities in parenthesis indicate quantity units in parenthesis at the head of each column.

k.
A maximum quantity of 200 pounds of solid or 20 gallons of liquid Class 3 oxidizers is allowed when such materials are necessary for maintenance purposes, operation or sanitation of equipment. Storage containers and the manner of storage shall be approved.


1. Net weight of the pyrotechnic composition of the fireworks. Where the net weight of the pyrotechnic composition of the fireworks is not known, 25 percent of the gross weight of the fireworks, including packaging, shall be used.
m.
For gallons of liquids, divide the amount in pounds by 10 in accordance with Section 5003.1.2 of the California Fire Code.

n.
For storage and display quantities in Group M and storage quantities in Group S occupancies complying with Section 414.2.5, see Tables 414.2.5(1) and 414.2.5(2).

o.
Densely packed baled cotton that complies with the packing requirements of ISO 8115 shall not be included in this material class.

p.
The following shall not be included in determining the maximum allowable quantities:


1.
Liquid or gaseous fuel in fuel tanks on vehicles.

2.
Liquid or gaseous fuel in fuel tanks on motorized equipment operated in accordance with this code.

3.
Gaseous fuels in piping systems and fixed appliances regulated by the California Fuel Gas Code.

4.
Liquid fuels in piping systems and fixed appliances regulated by the California Mechanical Code.


q. Where manufactured, generated or used in such a manner that the concentration and conditions create a fire or explosion hazard based on information prepared in accordance with Section 414.1.3.





96
201 3 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE


!\

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

b.
In retail and wholesale sales occupancies, the quantities of medicines, foodstuffs, consumer or industrial products, and cosmetics, containing not more than 50 percent by volume of water-miscible liquids and with the remainder of the solutions not being flammable, shall not be limited, provided that such materials are packaged in individual containers not exceeding 1.3 gallons.

c.
For storage and display quantities in Group M and storage quantities in Group S occupancies complying with Section 414.2.5, see Tables 414.2.5(1) and 414.2.5(2).

d.
The aggregate quantity in use and storage shall not exceed the quantity listed for storage.

e.
Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent in buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Where Note f also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.

f.
Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent when stored in approved storage cabinets, gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures as specified in the California Fire Code. Where Note ealso applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.

g.
Allowed only when stored in approved exhausted gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures as specified in the California Fire Code.

h.
Quantities in parenthesis indicate quantity units in parenthesis at the head of each column.

i.
For gallons of liquids, divide the amount in pounds by 10 in accordanc;e with Section 5003.1.2 of the California Fire Code.



Division 1.4
Division 1.5
Division 1.6

Organic peroxides, unclassified detonable Oxidizers, Class 4 Unstable (reactive) materials, Class 3 detonable and Class 4
[F] 307.3.1 Occupancies containing explosives not classified as H-1. The following occupancies containing explosive materials shall be classified as follows:
1.
Division 1.3 explosive materials that are used and maintained in a form where either confinement or configuration will not elevate the hazard from a mass fire to mass explosion hazard shall be allowed in H-2 occupancies.

2.
Articles, including articles packaged for shipment, that are not regulated as a Division 1.4 explosive under Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Exoplosives regulations, or unpackaged articles used in process operations that do not propagate a detonation or deflagration between articles shall be allowed in H-3 occupancies.


[F] 307.4 High-hazard Group H-2. Buildings and structures containing materials that pose a deflagration hazard or a hazard from accelerated burning shall be classified as Group H
2. Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Class I, II or IliA flammable or combustible liquids which are used or stored in normally open containers or sys





terns, or in closed containers or systems pressurized at more than 15 psi (103.4 kPa) gage

Combustible dusts where manufactured, generated or used in such a manner that the concentration and conditions create a fire or explosion hazard based on information prepared in accordance with Section 414.1.3
Cryogenic fluids, flammable Flammable gases Organic peroxides, Class I Oxidizers, Class 3, that are used or stored in normally
open containers or systems; or in closed containers or
sytems pressurized at more than 15 psi (103 kPa) gage Pyrophoric liquids, solids and gases, nondetonab1e Unstable (reactive) materials, Class 3, nondetonable Water-reactive materials, Class 3

[F] 307.5 High-hazard Group H-3. Buildings and structures containing materials that readily support combustion or that pose a physical hazard shall be classified as Group H-3. Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Class I, II or IliA flammable or combustible liquids that are used or stored in normally closed containers or systems pressurized at 15 pounds per square inch gauge
(103.4 kPa) or less Combustible fibers, other than densely packed baled
cotton
Consumer fireworks, 1.4G (Class C, Common)
Cryogenic fluids, oxidizing
Flammable solids
Organic peroxides, Class II and III
Oxidizers, Class 2


201 3 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE 	JULY 1, 2015 SUPPLEMENT
BLUE

USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION
Oxidizers, Class 3, that are used or stored in normally closed containers or systems pressurized at 15 pounds per square inch gauge (103 kPa) or less
Oxidizing gases
Unstable (reactive) materials, Class 2
Water-reactive materials, Class 2

[F]
307.6 11igh-hazard Group H-4. Buildings and structures which contain materials that are health hazards shall be classified as Group H-4. Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Corrosives
Highly toxic materials
Toxic materials


[F]
307.7 11igh-hazard Group H-5. Semiconductor fabrication facilities and comparable research and development areas in which hazardous production materials (HPM) are used and the aggregate quantity of materials is in excess of those listed in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) shall be classified as Group H-5. Such facilities and areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Section 415.10.

[F]
307.8 Multiple hazards. Buildings and structures containing a material or materials representing hazards that are classified in one or more of Groups H-1, H-2, H-3 and H-4 shall conform to the code requirements for each of the occupancies so classified.


SECTION 308
INSTITUTIONAL GROUP I

308.1 Institutional Group I. Institutional Group I occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, in which care or supervision is provided to persons who are or are not capable of self-preservation without physical assistance or in which persons are detained for penal or correctional purposes or in which the liberty of the occupants is restricted. Institutional occupancies shall be classified as Group 1-1, 1-2, I-2.1, 1-3 or 1-4. Restraint shall
II
not be permitted in any building except in Group I-3 occupancies constructed for such use, see Section 408.1.1.
Where occupancies house both ambulatory and nonambulatory persons, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
308.2 Deimitions. The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:
24-HOUR CARE.
CUSTODIAL CARE.
DETOXIFICATION FACILITIES.
FOSTER CARE FACILITIES.
HOSPITALS AND PSYCIDATRIC HOSPITALS.
INCAPABLE OF SELF-PRESERVATION.
MEDICAL CARE.
NURSING HOMES.
308.3 Institutional Group I-1. Not used. (See Group R-2. 1 Section 310.1)



308.4 Institutional Group I-2. This occupancy shall include buildings and structures used for medical care on a 24-hour basis for more than five persons who are incapable of selfpreservation or classified as nonambulatory or bedridden. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:


Foster care facilities
Detoxification facilities
Hospitals
Nursing homes
Psychiatric hospitals


308.4.1 Institutional Group 1-2.1 Ambulatory health care
1 1

facility. A healthcare facility that receives persons for out
patient medical care that may render the patient incapable
of unassisted self-preservation and where each tenant
space accommodates more than five such patients.



308.5 Institutional Group I-3. This occupancy shall include buildings and structures that are inhabited by one or more persons who are under restraint or security. An 1-3 facility is occupied by persons who are generally incapable of self-preservation due to security measures not under the occupants' control, which includes persons restrained. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Correctional centers
Courthouse holding facility


Detention centers
Detention treatment room
Jails

\

 Prerelease centers
)

Prisons
Reformatories
Secure interview rooms
Temporary holding facility
Buildings of Group 1-3 shall be classified as one of the occupancy conditions indicated in Sections 308.5.1 through
308.5.8 (see Section 408.1).
308.5.1 Condition 1. This occupancy condition shall
include buildings in which free movement is allowed from
sleeping areas, and other spaces where access or occu
pancy is permitted, to the exterior via means of egress
without restraint. A Condition 1 facility is permitted to be
constructed as Group R.


308.5.2 Condition 2. This occupancy condition shall
include buildings in which free movement is allowed from
sleeping areas and any other occupied smoke compartment
to one or more other smoke compartments. Egress to the
exterior is impeded by locked exits.



308.5.3 Condition 3. This occupancy condition shall
include buildings in which free movement is allowed
within individual smoke compartments, such as within a
residential unit comprised of individual sleeping units and
group activity spaces, where egress is impeded by remote
controlled release of means of egress from such a smoke
compartment to another smoke compartment.



308.5.4 Condition 4. This occupancy condition shall
include buildings in which free movement is restricted
from an occupied space. Remote-controlled release is pro
vided to permit movement from sleeping units, activity



BLUE



spaces and other occupied areas within the smoke compartment to other smoke compartments.
308.5.5 Condition 5. This occupancy condition shall include buildings in which free movement is restricted from an occupied space. Staff-controlled manual release is provided to permit movement from sleeping units, activity spaces and other occupied areas within the smoke compartment to other smoke compartments.
308.5.6 Condition 6. This occupancy condition shall include buildings containing only one temporary holding facility with five or less persons under restraint or security where the building is protected throughout with a monitored automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and where the temporary holding facility is protected throughout with an automatic fire alarm system with notification appliances. A Condition 6 building shall be is permitted to be classified as a Group B occupancy.
308.5.7 Condition 7. This occupancy condition shall include buildings containing only one temporary holding
facility with nine or less persons under restraint or security where limited to the first or second story, provided the building complies with Section 408.1.2.6. A Condition 7 building shall be permitted to be classified as a Group B occupancy.
308.5.8 Condition 8. This occupancy condition shall include buildings containing not more than four secure interview rooms located within the same fire area where not more than 6 six occupants under restraint are located in the same fire area. A Condition 8 building shall be is permitted to be classified as a Group B occupancy, provided the requirements in Section 408.1.2.7 are met.
308.6 Institutional Group 1-4, day care facilities. This group shall include buildings and structures occupied by more than six clients of any age who receive custodial care for fewer than 24 hours per day by persons other than parents or guardians, relatives by blood, marriage or adoption, and in a place other than the home of the clients cared for. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Adult day care
Child day care

308.6.1 Classification as Group E. A child day care facility that provides care for more than six but no more than 100 children under 2 years of age, where the rooms in which the children are cared for are located on a level of exit discharge serving such rooms and each of these child care rooms has an exit door directly to the exterior, shall be classified as Group E.
308.6.1.1 Special provisions. See Section 442.4 for daycares located above or below the first story.
SECTION 309
MERCANTILE GROUP M

309.1 Mercantile Group M. Mercantile Group M occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure or a portion thereof, for the display and sale of merchandise and



USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

involves stocks of goods, wares or merchandise incidental to such purposes and accessible to the public. Mercantile occupancies shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Department stores
Drug stores
Markets
Motor fuel-dispensing facilities
Retail or wholesale stores
Sales rooms



309.2 Quantity of hazardous materials. The aggregate quantity of nonflammable solid and nonflammable or noncombustible liquid hazardous materials stored or displayed in a single control area of a Group M occupancy shall not exceed the quantities in Table 414.2.5(1).

SECTION 310
RESIDENTIAL GROUP R



310.1 Residential Group R. Residential Group R includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for sleeping purposes when not classified as an Institutional Group I or when not regulated by the California Residential Code.
310.2 Definitions. The following terms are defined in Chap
ter 2:
AGED HOME OR INSTITUTION.
BEDRIDDEN PERSON.
BOARDING HOUSE.
CARE AND SUPERVISION.
CATASTROPHICAUY INJURED.
CHILD-CARE CENTER.
CHILD OR CHILDREN.
CHRONICALLY ILL
CONGREGATE LIVING HEALTH FACiliTY

(CLHF).
CONGREGATE RESIDENCE.
DAY CARE.
DAY-CARE HOME, FAMILY.
DAY-CARE HOME, lARGE FAMILY.
DAY-CARE HOME, SMAU FAMILY.

DORMITORY.
FULL-TIME CARE.
GROUP HOME.


INFANT.
MENTALLY RETARDED PERSONS, PROFOUNDLY

OR SEVERELY.
NONAMBUIATORY PERSONS.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACiliTY FOR THE

CHRONICAUY ILL (RCFICI).
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY FOR

THE ELDERLY (RCFE).
RESIDENTIAL FACiliTY (RF).
TERMINALLY ILL.

TRANSIENT.
310.3 Residential Group R-1. Residential occupancies containing sleeping units where the occupants are primarily transient in nature, including:
2013 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION


Boarding houses (transient) with more than 10 occupants Congregate residents (transient) with more than 10 occupants
Hotels (transient)
Motels (transient)

II [BCD 1] Efficiency dwelling units (transient)
310.4 Residential Group R-2. Residential occupancies containing sleeping units or more than two dwelling units where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature, including:
Apartment houses Boarding houses (nontransient) with more than 16 occupants Congregate residences (nontransient) with more
than 16 occupants
Convents
Dormitories
Fraternities and sororities
Hotels (nontransient)
Live/work units
Monasteries
Motels (nontransient)
Vacation timeshare properties

[BCD 1] Efficiency dwelling units (nontransient)
310.4.1 Residential Group R-2.1 This occupancy shall
II
include buildings, structures or parts thereof housing clients, on a 24-hour basis, who because of age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment that provides personal care services.
This occupancy may contain more than six nonambulatory and/or bedridden clients. (See Section 425 Special Provisions for Licensed 24-Hour Care Facilities in a Group R-2. 1, R-3. 1 or R-4 Occupancy). This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Assisted living facilities such as:

Residential care facilities,
Residential care facilities for the elderly (RCFEs),
Adult residential facilities,
Congregate living health facilities,
Group homes,
Residential care facilities for the chronically ill,
Congregate living health facilities for the terminally ill.

Social rehabilitation facilities such as:

Halfway houses,
Community correctional centers,
Community correction reentry centers,
Community treatment programs,
Work furlough programs,
Alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment

facilities.
310.5 Residential Group R-3. Residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature and not classified as Group R-1, R-2, R-2.1, R-3.1, R-4 or I, including:
Buildings that do 	not contain more than two dwelling units Boarding houses (nontransient) with 16 or fewer
100



occupants Boarding houses (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants Adult care facilities that provide accommodations for six or fewer clients of any age for less than 24 hours.
Licensing categories that may use this classification include, but are not limited to:
Adult Day Programs.
Child care facilities that provide accommodations for six or fewer clients of any age for less than 24 hours. Licensing categories that may use this classification include, but are not limited to:
Day-Care Center for Mildly Ill Children,
Infant Care Center,
School Age Child Day-Care Center.

Congregate residences (nontransient) with 16 or fewer occupants Congregate residences (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants
[BCD 1] Efficiency dwelling units
Family Day-Care Homes that provide accommodations
for 14 or fewer children, in the provider's own home for less than 24-hours.
Alcoholism or drug abuse recovery homes (ambulatory only) Foster family homes (ambulatory only)


Adult care and child care facilities that are within a single family home are permitted to comply with the
California Residential Code.


310.5.1 Residential Group R-3.1 This occupancy group may include facilities licensed by a governmental agency for a residentially based 24-hour care facility providing accommodations for six or fewer clients of any age. Clients may be classified as ambulatory, nonambulatory or bedridden. A Group R-3. 1 occupancy shall meet the requirements for construction as defined for Group R-3, except as otherwise provided for in Section 425 Special Provisions For Licensed 24-Hour Care Facilities in a Group R-2.1, R-3.1 or R-4 Occupancy. This group may include:
Adult residential facilities Congregate living health facilities Foster family homes Group homes Intermediate care facilities for the developmentally
disabled habilitative Intermediate care facilities for the developmentally disabled nursing
Nurseries for the full-time care of children under the age of six, but not including "infants" as defined in Section 310
Residential care facilities for the elderly Small family homes and residential care facilities for the chronically ill
Exception: Group Homes licensed by the Department of Social Services which provide nonmedical board, room and care for six or fewer ambulatory children or
2013 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE





-



0

II<


USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION

(_)

/
)
... .. ___.,
children two years of age or younger, and which do not have any nonambulatory clients shall not be subject to regulations found in Section 425.
Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13143 with respect to these exempted facilities, no city, county or public district shall adopt or enforce any requirement for the prevention of fire or for the protection of life and property against fire and panic unless the requirement would be applicable to a structure regardless of the special occupancy. Nothing shall restrict the application of state or local housing standards to such facilities if the standards are applicable to residential occupancies and are not based on the use of the structure as a facility for ambulatory children. For the purpose of this exception, ambulatory children does not include relatives of the licensee or the licensee 's spouse.
310.6 Residential Group R-4. This occupancy shall include buildings, structures or portions thereof for more than six ambulatory clients, but not more than 16 persons, excluding staff, who reside on a 24-hour basis in a supervised residential environment and receive custodial care. The persons receiving care are capable of self-preservation. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
This occupancy classification may include a maximum six nonambulatory or bedridden clients (see Section 425 Special Provisions for Licensed 24-Hour Care Facilities in a Group R-2. 1, R-3. 1 or R-4 Occupancy). Group R-4 occupancies shall include the following:

Assisted living facilities such as:
Residential care facilities,
Residential care facilities for the elderly (RCFE),
Adult residential facilities,
Congregate living health facilities,
Group homes.

Social rehabilitation facilities such as:
Halfway houses,
Community correctional centers,
Community correction reentry centers,
Community treatment programs,
Work furlough programs,
Alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities.

Group R-4 occupancies shall meet the requirements for construction as defined for Group R-3, except as otherwise provided for in this code.
310.7 Large Family Day-Care Homes. See Section 445.
SECTION 31 1
STORAGE GROUP S

311.1 Storage Group S. Storage Group S occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for storage that is not classified as a hazardous occupancy.
311.2 Moderate-hazard storage, Group S-1. Buildings occupied for storage uses that are not classified as Group S-2, including, but not limited to, storage of the following: Aerosols, Levels 2 and 3
Aircraft hangar (storage and repair)
Bags: cloth, burlap and paper
Bamboos and rattan
Baskets
Belting: canvas and leather
Books and paper in rolls or packs


Boots and shoes
Buttons, including cloth covered, pearl or bone

Cardboard and cardboard boxes
Clothing, woolen wearing apparel
Cordage
Dry boat storage (indoor)
Furniture
Furs
Glues, mucilage, pastes and size
Grains
Horns and combs, other than celluloid
Leather
Linoleum
Lumber
Motor vehicle repair garages complying with the
maximum allowable quantities of hazardous materials
listed in Table 307.1(1) (see Section 406.8)
Photo engravings
Resilient flooring
Silks

Soaps
Sugar
Tires, bulk storage of
Tobacco, cigars, cigarettes and snuff
Upholstery and mattresses
Wax candles

311.3 Low-hazard storage, Group S-2. Includes, among others, buildings used for the storage of noncombustible materials such as products on wood pallets or in paper cartons with or without single thickness divisions; or in paper wrappings. Such products are permitted to have a negligible amount of plastic trim, such as knobs, handles or film wrapping. Group S-2 storage uses shall include, but not be limited to, storage of the following:

Asbestos
Beverages up to and including 16-percent alcohol in
metal, glass or ceramic containers
Cement in bags
Chalk and crayons
Dairy products in nonwaxed coated paper containers
Dry cell batteries
Electrical coils
Electrical motors
Empty cans
Food products
Foods in noncombustible containers
Fresh fruits and vegetables in nonplastic trays or
containers Frozen foods Glass Glass bottles, empty or filled with noncombustible liquids Gypsum board Inert pigments



2013 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION



Ivory
Meats
Metal cabinets
Metal desks with plastic tops and trim
Metal parts
Metals
Mirrors
Oil-filled and other types of distribution transformers
Parking garages, open or enclosed
Porcelain and pottery
Stoves
Talc and soapstones
Washers and dryers

.

SECTION 312
UTILITY AND MISCELLANEOUS GROUP U

312.1 General. Buildings and structures of an accessory character and miscellaneous structures not classified in any specific occupancy shall be constructed, equipped and maintained to conform to the requirements of this code commensurate with the fire and life hazard incidental to their occupancy. Group U shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



Agricultural buildings
Aircraft hangars, accessory to a one-or two-family
residence (see Section 412.5)
Barns
Carports
Fences more than 6 feet (1829 mm) in height
0
Grain silos, accessory to a residential occupancy
Greenhouses
Livestock shelters
Private garages
Retaining walls
Sheds
Stables
Tanks
Towers

SECTION 313
LABORATORIES GROUP.L [SFM]

313.1 Laboratories Group L [SFM] Group L occupancy includes the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, containing one or more laboratory suites as defined in Section 443.

2013 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE




CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE -MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE
