CHAPTER 8 -INTERIOR FINISHES

(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.)
HCD DSA OSHPD
Adopting agency BSC SFM BSCC DPH AGR DWR CEC CA SL SLC 1 2 1/AC AC ssSS/CC 1 2 3 4
Adopt entire chapter X X X X X X X X Adopt entire chapter as amended
X
(amended sections listed below)
Adopt only those sections that are listed below
Chapter I Section
Table 803.9 X
804.4 X
804.4.1 X
804.4.2 X
804. 4.3 X
806.1 X
II

806.5 X








201 3 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE JULY 1, 2015 SUPPLEMENT
BLUE



J
)





302
BLUE
CHAPTER S
INTERIOR FINISHES

0
SECTION 801 GENERAL
801.1 Scope. Provisions of this chapter shall govern the use
of materials used as interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.
0
801.2 Interior wall and ceiling finish. The provisions of Section 803 shall limit the allowable fire performance and
. smoke development of interior wall and ceiling finish materials based on occupancy classification.

801.3 Interior floor finish. The provisions of Section 804 shall limit the allowable fire performance of interior floor fmish materials based on occupancy classification.
[F] 801.4 Decorative materials and trim. Decorative materials and trim shall be restricted by combustibility and the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701, in accordance with Section 806.
0
801.5 Applicability. For buildings in flood hazard areas as established in Section 1612.3, interior finishes, trim and decorative materials below the elevation required by Section 1612 shall be flood-damage-resistant materials.

801.6 Application. Combustible materials shall be permitted to be used as fmish for walls, ceilings, floors and other inte
rior surfaces of buildings.
801.7 Windows. Show windows in the exterior walls of the frrst story above grade plane shall be permitted to be of wood or of unprotected metal framing.
801.8 Foam plastics. Foam plastics shall not be used as interior finish except as provided in Section 803.4. Foam plastics shall not be used as interior trim except as provided in Section 806.3 or 2604.2. This section shall apply both to exposed foam plastics and to foam plastics used in conjunction with a textile or vinyl facing or cover.
CJ SECTION 802 DEFINITIONS
802.1 Definitions. The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:
EXPANDED VINYL WALL COVERING.
CJ
FLAME SPREAD.
FLAME SPREAD INDEX.
INTERIOR FINISH.
INTERIOR FLOOR FINISH.
INTERIOR FLOOR-WALL BASE.

INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH.
SITE-FABRICATED STRETCH SYSTEM.

SMOKE-DEVELOPED INDEX.
TRIM.

SECTION 803
WALL AND CEILING FINISHES


803.1 General. Interior wall and ceiling finish materials shall be classified for fire performance and smoke development in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2, except as shown in Sections 803 .2 through 803.13. Materials tested in accordance with Section 803.1.2 shall not be required to be tested in accordance with Section 803.1.1.
803.1.1 Interior wall and ceiling finish materials.


Interior wall and ceiling finish materials shall be classified in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL723. Such interior finish materials shall be grouped in the following classes in accordance with their flame spread and smoke-developed

= 	Flame spread index 0-25; smoke-developed index 0-450.
= 	Flame spread index 26-75; smoke-developed index 0-450.
= 	Flame spread index 76-200; smoke-developed index 0-450.
Exception: Materials tested in accordance with Section

803.1.2 Room corner test for interior wall or ceiling finish materials. Interior wall or ceiling finish materials shall be permitted to be tested in accordance with NFP A
286. Interior wall or ceiling finish materials tested in accordance with NFP A 286 shall comply with Section
803.1.2.1 Acceptance criteria for NFP A 286. The interior finish shall comply with the following:
1.
During the 40 kW exposure, flames shall not spread to the ceiling.

2.
The flame shall not spread to the outer extremity of the sample on any wall or ceiling.

3.
Flashover, 	as defmed in NFPA 286, shall not occur.

4.
The peak heat release rate throughout the test shall not exceed 800 kW.

5.
The total smoke released throughout the test shall not exceed 1,000 m2






803.1.3 Room corner test for textile wall coverings and expanded vinyl wall coverings. Textile wall coverings and expanded vinyl wall coverings shall meet the criteria of Section 803.1.3.1 when tested in the manner intended for use in accordance with the Method B protocol of NFP A 265 using the product-mounting system, including adhesive.



2013 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE INTERIOR FINISHES

803.1.3.1 Acceptance criteria for NFPA 265. The interior finish shall comply with the following:
1.
During the 40 kW exposure, flames shall not spread to the ceiling.

2.
The flame shall not spread to the outer extremities of the samples on the 8-foot by 12-foot (203 by 305 mm) walls.

3.
Flashover, 	as defined in NFPA 265, shall not occur.

4.
The total smoke released throughout the test shall not exceed 1,000 m2


803.1.4 Acceptance criteria for textile and expanded vinyl wall or ceiling coverings tested to ASTM E 84 or UL 723. Textile wall and ceiling coverings and expanded vinyl wall and ceiling coverings shall have a Class A flame spread index in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723 and be protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or
903.3.1.2. Test specimen preparation and mounting shall be in accordance with ASTM E 2404.
803.2 Thickness exemption. Materials having a thickness less than 0.036 inch (0.9 mm) applied directly to the surface of walls or ceilings shall not be required to be tested.

803.3 Heavy timber exemption. Exposed portions of structural members complying with the requirements for buildings of Type IV construction in Section 602.4 shall not be subject to interior finish requirements.
803.4 Foam plastics. Foam plastics shall not be used as interior finish except as provided in Section 2603.10. This section shall apply both to exposed foam plastics and to foam plastics used in conjunction with a textile or vinyl facing or cover.
803.5 Textile wall coverings. Where used as interior wall finish materials, textile wall coverings, including materials having woven or nonwoven, napped, tufted, looped or similar surface and carpet and similar textile materials, shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.2, 803.1.3 or 803.1.4.
803.6 Textile ceiling coverings. Where used as interior ceiling finish materials, textile ceiling coverings, including materials having woven or nonwoven, napped, tufted, looped or similar surface and carpet and similar textile materials, shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.2 or 803.1.4.
803.7 Expanded vinyl wall coverings. Where used as interior wall finish materials, expanded vinyl wall coverings shall be tested . in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.2, 803.1.3 or 803.1.4.
803.8 Expanded vinyl ceiling coverings. Where used as interior ceiling finish materials, expanded vinyl ceiling coverings shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.2 or 803 .1.4.




803.9 Interior finish requirements based on group. Interior wall and ceiling finish shall have a flame spread index not greater than that specified in Table 803.9 for the group and location designated. Interior wall and ceiling f"lnish materials tested in accordance with NFP A 286 and meeting the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.2.1, shall be permitted to be used where a Class A classification in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL723 is required.
803.10 Stability. Interior finish materials regulated by this chapter shall be applied or otherwise fastened in such a manner that such materials will not readily become detached where subjected to room temperatures of 200F (93C) for not less than 30 minutes.
803.11 Application of interior finish materials to fireresistance-rated or noncombustible building elements.
Where interior finish materials are applied on walls, ceilings or structural elements required to have a fire-resistance rating or to be of noncombustible construction, they shall comply with the provisions of this section.
803.11.1 Direct attachment and furred construction.
Where walls and ceilings are required by any provision in this code to be of fire-resistance-rated or noncombustible construction, the interior finish material shall be applied directly against such construction or to furring strips not exceeding 13/4 inches (44 mm), applied directly against such surfaces.
803.11.1.1 Furred construction. If the interior finish material is applied to furring strips, the intervening spaces between such furring strips shall comply with one of the following:

1.
Be filled with material that is inorganic or noncombustible;

2.
Be filled with material that meets the requirements of a Class A material in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2; or

3.
Be frreblocked 	at a maximum of 8 feet (2438 mm) in every direction in accordance with Section 718.



803.11.2 Set-out construction. Where walls and ceilings are required to be of fire-resistance-rated or noncombustible construction and walls are set out or ceilings are dropped distances greater than specified in Section
803.11.1, Class A finish materials, in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1 .2, shall be used.
Exceptions:
1.
Where interior finish materials are protected on both sides by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

2.
Where interior finish materials 	are attached to noncombustible backing or furring strips installed as specified in Section 803.11.1.1.



803.11.2.1 Hangers and assembly members. The hangers and assembly members of such dropped ceilings that are below the horizontal frre-resistance rated floor or roof assemblies shall be of noncombustible materials. The construction of each set-out wall and




2013 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE



INTERIOR FINISHES

TABLE 803.9 INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH REQUIREMENTS BY OCCUPANCYk
GROUP  SPRINKLEREDl  NONSPRINKLERED
Interior exit stairways, interior exit ramps and exit passagewaysa, b  Corridors and enclosure for exit access stairways and exit access ramps  Rooms and enclosed spacesc  Interior exit stairways, interior exit ramps and exit passagewaysa, b  Corridors and enclosure for exit access stairways and exit access ramps  Rooms and enclosed spacesc
A-1 & A-2  B  B  C  A  Ad  Be
A-3f, A-4, A-5  B  B  C  A  Ad  C
B, E, M, R-1  B  C  C  A  B  C
R-4  B  C  C  A  B  B
F  C  C  C  B  C  C
H, L  B  B  Cg  A  A  B
I-2, I-2.1  B  B  Bh, i  A  A  B
I-3  A  Aj  B  NP  NP  NP
I-4  B  B  Bh, i  A  A  B
R-2  C  C  C  B  B  C
R-2.1  B  C  C  A  B  B
R-3, R-3.1  C  C  C  C  C  C
S  C  C  C  B  B  C
U  No restrictions  No restrictions

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929m2.
NP = Not permitted [SFM]
a.
Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted for wainscotting or paneling of not more than 1,000 square feet of applied surface area in the grade lobby where applied directly to a noncombustible base or over furring strips applied to a noncombustible base and fireblocked as required by Section 803.11.1.

b.
In other than Group I-2 and I-2.1 occupanicies in buildings less than three stories above grade plane of other than Group I-3, Class B interior finish for nonsprinklered buildings and Class C interior finish for sprinklered buildings shall be permitted in interior exit stairways and ramps.

c.
Requirements for rooms and enclosed spaces shall be based upon spaces enclosed by partitions. Where a fire-resistance rating is required for structural elements, the enclosing partitions shall extend from the floor to the ceiling. Partitions that do not comply with this shall be considered enclosing spaces and the rooms or spaces on both sides shall be considered one. In determining the applicable requirements for rooms and enclosed spaces, the specific occupancy thereof shall be the governing factor regardless of the group classification of the building or structure.

d.
Lobby areas in Group A-1, A-2 and A-3 occupancies shall not be less than Class B materials.

e.
Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted in places of assembly with an occupant load of 300 persons or less.

f.
For places of religious worship, wood used for ornamental purposes, trusses, paneling or chancel furnishing shall be permitted.

g.
Class B material is required where the building exceeds two stories.

h.
Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted in administrative spaces.

i.
Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted in rooms with a capacity of four persons or less.

j.
Class B materials shall be permitted as wainscotting extending not more than 48 inches above the finished floor in corridors and exit access stairways and ramps.

k.
Finish materials as provided for in other sections of this code.

l.
Applies when protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.


horizontal fire-resistance rated floor or roof assembly ment without the use of furring strips and shall not be susshall be of fire-resistance-rated construction as required pended away from the building element to which it is elsewhere in this code.
applied.
Exception: In Types III and V construction, fire-

Exceptions:

retardant-treated wood shall be permitted for use as 1. Noncombustible interior finish materials.
hangers and assembly members of dropped ceilings.
803.11.3 Heavy timber construction. Wall and ceiling 2. Materials that meet the requirements of Class A finishes of all classes as permitted in this chapter that are materials in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or installed directly against the wood decking or planking of 803.1.2 where the qualifying tests were made Type IV construction or to wood furring strips applied with the material furred out from the noncombusdirectly to the wood decking or planking shall be fire-tible backing shall be permitted to be used with blocked as specified in Section 803.11.1.1. furring strips.
803.11.4 Materials. An interior wall or ceiling finish 3. Materials that meet the requirements of Class A material that is not more than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) thick shall materials in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or be applied directly onto the wall, ceiling or structural ele-803.1.2 where the qualifying tests were made
with the material suspended away from the non

2013 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE JULY 1, 2015 ERRATA
BUFF
INTERIOR FINISHES
combustible backing shall be permitted to be used suspended away from the building element.
803.12 High-density Polyethylene (HDPE) and Polypropylene (PP). Where high-density polyethylene or polypropylene is used as an interior finish it shall comply with Section 803.1.2.
803.13 Site-fabricated stretch systems. Where used as interior wall or interior ceiling finish materials, site-fabricated stretch systems containing all three components described in the definition in Section 802 shall be tested in the manner intended for use, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2. If the materials are tested in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723, specimen preparation and mounting shall be in accordance with ASTM E 2573.
SECTION 804
INTERIOR FLOOR FINISH

804.1 General. Interior floor finish and floor covering materials shall comply with Sections 804.2 through 804.4.2.
Exception: Floor finishes and coverings of a traditional type, such as wood, vinyl, linoleum or terrazzo, and resilient floor covering materials that are not comprised of fibers.
804.2 Classification. Interior floor finish and floor covering materials required by Section 804.4.2 to be of Class I or II materials shall be classified in accordance with NFPA 253. The classification referred to herein corresponds to the classifications determined by NFPA 253 as follows: Class I, 0.45 watts/cm2 or greater; Class II, 0.22 watts/cm2 or greater.
804.3 Testing and identification. Interior floor finish and floor covering materials shall be tested by an agency in accordance with NFPA 253 and identified by a hang tag or other suitable method so as to identify the manufacturer or supplier and style, and shall indicate the interior floor finish or floor covering classification according to Section 804.2. Carpet-type floor coverings shall be tested as proposed for use, including underlayment. Test reports confirming the information provided in the manufacturer's product identification shall be furnished to the building official upon request.
804.4 Interior floor finish requirements. Interior floor covering materials shall comply with Sections 804.4.1 and
804.4.2 and interior floor finish materials shall comply with Section 804.4.3.
804.4.1 Test requirement. In all other occupancies except I-3, interior floor finish and interior floor covering materials shall comply with the requirements of the ASTM Standard E 648, and having a specific optical density smoke rating not to exceed 450 per ASTM E 662. For Group I-3 occupancies see Section 804.4.3.
804.4.2 Minimum critical radiant flux. In all occupancies, interior floor finish and floor covering materials in enclosures for stairways and ramps, exit passageways, corridors and rooms or spaces not separated from corridors by partitions extending from the floor to the underside of the ceiling shall withstand a minimum critical radiant flux. The minimum critical radiant flux shall not be less than Class I in Groups I-2 and not less than Class II in Groups A, B, E, H, I-2.1, I- 4, M, R-1, R-2 and S.
Exception: Where a building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, Class II materials are permitted in any area where Class I materials are required, and materials complying with ASTM Standard E 648, and having a specific optical density smoke rating not to exceed 450 per ASTM E 662 are permitted in any area where Class II materials are required.
804.4.3 Group I-3 Occupancy floor surfaces. Interior floor finish and floor coverings occupied by inmates or patients whose personal liberties are restrained shall be noncombustible.
Exception: Noncombustible floor finish and floor coverings in areas where restraint is not used may have carpet or other floor covering materials applied in areas protected by an automatic sprinkler system and meeting ASTM Standard E 648, and having a specific optical density smoke rating not to exceed 450 per ASTM E 662. The carpeting and carpet padding shall be tested as a unit in accordance with floor covering radiant panel test meeting class 1 and has a critical radiant flux limit of not less than 0.45 watt per centimeter square. The carpeting and padding shall be identified by a hang-tag or other suitable method as to manufacturer and style and shall indicate the classification of the material based on the limits set forth above.
SECTION 805
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS IN
TYPES I AND II CONSTRUCTION


805.1 Application. Combustible materials installed on or embedded in floors of buildings of Type I or II construction shall comply with Sections 805.1.1 through 805.1.3.
Exception: Stages and platforms constructed in accordance with Sections 410.3 and 410.4, respectively.
805.1.1 Subfloor construction. Floor sleepers, bucks and nailing blocks shall not be constructed of combustible materials, unless the space between the fire-resistancerated floor assembly and the flooring is either solidly filled with noncombustible materials or fireblocked in accordance with Section 718, and provided that such open spaces shall not extend under or through permanent partitions or walls.
805.1.2 Wood finish flooring. Wood finish flooring is permitted to be attached directly to the embedded or fire-blocked wood sleepers and shall be permitted where cemented directly to the top surface of fire-resistancerated floor assemblies or directly to a wood subfloor attached to sleepers as provided for in Section 805.1.1.
805.1.3 Insulating boards. Combustible insulating boards not more than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) thick and covered with finish flooring are permitted where attached directly to a noncombustible floor assembly or to wood subflooring attached to sleepers as provided for in Section 805.1.1.
BUFF
!\	SECTION 806

) DECORATIVE MATERIALS AND TRIM
[F] 806.1 General requirements. In occupancies in Groups A,E, I and R-1 and dormitories in Group R-2, curtains, draperies, hangings and other decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section

./\
806.2 or be noncombustible.
)
Exceptions:
1.
Curtains, draperies, hangings and other decorative materials suspended from walls of sleeping units and dwelling units in dormitories in Group R-2 protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1 and such materials are limited to not more than 50 percent of the aggregate area of walls.

2.
Decorative materials, including, but not limited to, photographs and paintings in dormitories in Group R-2 where such materials are of limited quantities such that a hazard of fire development or spread is not present.



II In Groups I-1, I-2 and 1-2.1, combustible decorative materials shall meet the flame propagation criteria of NFPA 701 unless the decorative materials, including, but not limited to, photographs and paintings, are of such limited quantities that a hazard of fire development or spread is not present. In Group I-3, combustible decorative materials are prohibited.

Fixed or movable walls and partitions, paneling, wall pads and crash pads applied structurally or for decoration, acoustical correction, surface insulation or other purposes shall be considered interior finish if they cover 10 percent or more of the wall or of the ceiling area, and shall not be considered decorative materials or furnishings.
In Group B and M occupancies, fabric partitions suspended from the ceiling and not supported by the floor shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria in accordance with Section 806.2 and NFPA 701 or shall be noncombustible.
[F]
806.1.1 Noncombustible materials. The permissible amount of noncombustible decorative material shall not be limited.


[F]
806.1.2 Combustible decorative materials. The permissible amount of decorative materials meeting the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 shall not exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area to which it is attached.



Exceptions:
1. In 	auditoriums in Group A, the permissible amount of decorative material meeting the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 shall not exceed 75 percent of the aggregate wall area where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance



INTERIOR FINISHES


with Section 903.3.1.1 and where the material is installed in accordance with Section 803.11.
2. The amount of fabric partitions suspended from the ceiling and not supported by the floor in Group B and M occupancies shall not be limited.
[F]
806.2 Acceptance criteria and reports. Where required by Section 806. 1, decorative materials shall be tested by an agency and meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 or such materials shall be noncombustible. Reports of test results shall be prepared in accordance with NFPA 701 and furnished to the building official upon request.

[F]
806.3 Foam plastic. Foam plastic used as trim in any occupancy shall comply with Section 2604.2.

[F]
806.4 Pyroxylin plastic. Imitation leather or other material consisting of or coated with a pyroxylin or similarly hazardous base shall not be used in Group A occupancies.

[F]
806.5 Interior trim. Material, other than foam plastic used as interior trim, shall have a minimum Class B flame spread and 450 smoke-developed index in Group 1-3 and for all other occupancies Class C flame spread and smoke-developed index when tested in accordance with ASTM E 84 or UL 723, as described in Section 803.1.1. Combustible trim, excluding handrails and guardrails, shall not exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area in which it is attached.

[F]
806.6 Interior floor-wall base. Interior floor-wall base that is 6 inches (152 mm) or less in height shall be tested in accordance with Section 804.2 and shall not be less than Class II. Where a Class I floor finish is required, the floorwall base shall be Class I.


Exception: Interior trim materials that comply with Section 806.5.
SECTION 807
INSULATION


807.1 Insulation. Thermal and acoustical insulation shall comply with Section 720.
SECTION 808
ACOUSTICAL CEILING SYSTEMS


808.1 Acoustical ceiling systems. The quality, design, fabrication and erection of metal suspension systems for acoustical tile and lay-in panel ceilings in buildings or structures shall conform with generally accepted engineering practice, the provisions of this chapter and other applicable requirements of this code.
808.1.1 Materials and installation. Acoustical materials complying with the interior finish requirements of Section 803 shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and applicable provisions for applying interior finish.



2013 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE 	JULY 1, 2015 SUPPLEMENT
BLUE

INTERIOR FINISHES

808.1.1.1 Suspended acoustical ceilings. Suspended acoustical ceiling systems shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of ASTM C 635 and ASTM c636.
808.1.1.2 Fire-resistance-rated construction. Acoustical ceiling systems that are part of fire-resistance
rated construction shall be installed in the same manner used in the assembly tested and shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 7.








308
BLUE


CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE -MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE
