---
chapter: Chapter 1
title: SCOPE AND APPLICATION
---

0 DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 1. 1 0 GENERAL



}.1.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Califor≠nia Residential Code, may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code. " The California Residential Code is Part 2.5 of twelve parts of the official compilation and publication of the adoption, amendment and repeal of building regulations to the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, also referred to as the California Building Standards Code. This part incorporates by adoption the 2012 Interna≠tional Residential Code of the International Code Council with necessary California amendments.
1.1.2 Purpose. The purpose of this code is to establish the 0 minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of
egress facilities, stability, access to persons with disabilities, sanitation, adequate lighting and ventilation, and energy conservation; safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment; and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.
1.1.3 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replace≠ment, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, main≠
II twtenance, removal and demolition of every detached one-and o-family dwelling, efficiency dwelling unit, and townhouse not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and structures accessory thereto throughout the State of California.

Exceptions:
1. Live/work units complying with the requirements of Section 419 of the California Building Code shall be permitted to be built as one-and two-family dwell≠ings or townhouses. Fire suppression required by Section 419.5 of the California Building Code when constructed under the California Residential Code for one-and two1amily dwellings shall conform to Section 903.3.1.3 of the California Building Code.


u

2. Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guestrooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the California Residential Code for One-and Two1amily Dwellings when equipped with
a fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section R313.


1.1.3.1 Classification. Structures or portions of structures shall be classified with respect ∑to occupancy in one or more of the groups listed below. A room or space that is intended to be occupied at different times for different pur≠poses shall comply with all of the requirements that are applicable to each of the purposes for which the room or space will be occupied. Structures with multiple occupan≠cies or uses shall comply with Section 508 of the Califor≠nia Building Code. Where a structure is proposed for a purpose that is not specifically provided for in this code, such structure shall be classified in the group that the occupancy most nearly resembles, according to the fire safety and relative hazard involved in accordance with this code or the California Building Code.
1.1.3.1.1 Residential Group R. Residential Group R includes, among others, the use of a building or struc≠ture, or a portion thereof, for sleeping purposes when not classified as an Institutional Group I. Residential occupancies shall include the following:
R-3 Residential occupancies where the occupants
are primarily permanent in nature and not classified
as Group R-1, R-2, R-2.1, R-3.1, R-4 or/, including:
Buildings that do not contain more than two dwelling units.
Townhouses not more than three stories above grade in height with a separate means of egress.
Adult facilities that provide accommodations for six or fewer persons of any age for less than 24-hours. Licensing categories that may use this classification include, but are not limited to:
Adult Day Programs.

Child care facilities that provide accommoda≠tions for six or fewer persons of any age for less than 24-hours. Licensing categories that may use this classification include, but are not limited to:
Day-care Center for Mildly Ill Children, Infant Care Center and School Age Child Day-care Center.
Family Day-care Homes that provide accommo≠dations for 14 or fewer children, in the provider's own home for less than 24-hours.







Congregate living facilities or congregate resi≠dences with 16 or fewer persons.
R-3. 1 This occupancy group may include facilities licensed by a governmental agency for a residen≠tially based 24-hour care facility providing accom≠modations for six or fewer clients of any age. Clients may be classified as ambulatory, nonambulatory or bedridden. A Group R-3.1 occupancy shall meet the requirements for construction as defined for Group
R-3, except as otherwise provided for in Section R325 Special Provisions For Licensed 24-Hour Care Facilities in a Group R-3. 1 Occupancy. This group may include:

Adult Residential Facilities Congregate Living
Health Facilities Foster Family Homes Group Homes Intermediate Care Facilities for the develop≠
mentally disabled habilitative Intermediate Care Facilities for the developmen≠tally disabled nursing
Nurseries for the full-time care of children under the age of six, but not including "infants " as defined in Section 202
Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly Small Family Homes and Residential Care Facil≠ities for the chronically ill
Exception: Foster Family Homes or Group Homes licensed by the Department of Social Services which provide nonmedical board, room and care for six or fewer ambulatory children or children two years of age or younger, and which do not have any nonam≠bulatory clients shall not be subject to regula≠tions found in Section R325.
Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13143 with respect to these exempted facilities, no city, county or public district shall adopt or enforce any requirement for the prevention of fire or for the protection of life and property against fire and panic unless the requirement would be applicable to a structure regardless of the special occupancy. Noth≠ing shall restrict the application of state or local housing standards to such facilities if the standards are applicable to residential occupancies and are not based on the use of the structure as a facility for ambulatory children. For the purpose of this excep≠tion, ambulatory children does not include relatives of the licensee or the licensee's spouse.
Large Family Day-Care Homes. See Section R326.
1.1.3.1.2 Utility and Miscellaneous Group U. Build≠ings and structures of an accessory character and mis≠cellaneous structures not classified in any specific occupancy shall be constructed, equipped and main≠tained to conform to the requirements of this code com≠mensurate with the fire and life hazard incidental to their occupancy. Group U shall include, but not be lim≠ited to, the following:



Agricultural buildings

Aircraft hangars, accessory to a one-or two-family residence (see Section 412.5 of the California Building Code)
Barns
Carports
Fences more than 6feet (1829 mm) high
Grain silos, accessory to a residential occupancy
Greenhouses

Livestock shelters
Private garages
Retaining walls
Sheds
Stables
Tanks
Towers






1.1.3.2 Regulated buildings, structures and applications.
The model code, state amendments to the model code, and/ or state amendments where there are no relevant model code provisions shall apply to detached one-and two-fam≠ily dwellings, townhouses and structures accessory thereto. State agencies with regulatory authority as speci-< fled in Sections 1.2 through 1.14, except where modified by local ordinance pursuant to Section 1.1.8. When adopted by a state agency, the provisions of this code shall be enforced by the appropriate enforcing agency, but only to the extent of authority granted to such agency by the state legislature.
Note: See Preface to distinguish the model code provi≠

()

sions from the California provisions.
1. 	
One-and two1amily dwellings, townhouses,
employee housing, factory-built housing and other
types of dwellings containing sleeping accommoda≠
tions with common toilets or cooking facilities. See
Section 1.8.1.1.1.


2.
Permanent 	buildings and permanent accessory
buildings or structures constructed within mobile≠
home parks and special occupancy parks regulated
by the Department of Housing and Community
Development. See Section 1.8.1.1.3.


3.
Applications regulated by the Office 	of the State
Fire Marshal include, but are not limited to, the fol≠
lowing in accordance with Section 1.11:




II
II
C)
3.l.Buildings or structures used or intended for use as alan:
1. Home for the elderly, children's nursery, chil≠dren's home or institution, school or any simi≠lar occupancy of any capacity
('-)
2.
Small family day-care 	homes, large family day-care homes, residential facilities and resi≠dential facilities for the elderly, residential care facilities

3.
State 	institutions or other state-owned or state-occupied buildings

4.
Residential structures




2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


5. Tents, awnings or other fabric enclosures used in connection with any dccupancy
6.
Fire alarm devices, equipment and systems in connection with any occupancy

7.
Wildland-urban interface fire areas



0
0
1.1.4 Appendices. Provisions contained in the appendices of this code shall not apply unless specifically adopted by a state agency or adopted by a local enforcing agency in com≠pliance with Health and Safety Code Section I890I et seq. for Building Standards Law, Health and Safety Code Section 17950 for State Housing Law and Health and Safety Code Section 13869.7 for Fire Protection Districts. See Section
J.I.8 of this code.
1.1.5 Referenced codes. The codes, standards and publica≠tions adopted and set forth in this code, including other codes, standards and publications referred to therein are, by title and date of publication, hereby adopted as standard ref≠erence documents of this code. When this code does not spe≠cifically cover any subject related to building design and construction, recognized architectural or engineering prac≠tices shall be employed. The National Fire Codes, standards and the Fire Protection Handbook of the National Fire Pro≠tection Association are permitted to be used as authoritative guides in determining recognized fire prevention engineering practices.
0

1.1.6 Nonbuilding standards, orders and regulations.
Requirements contained in the International Residential Code, or in any other referenced standard, code or document,
which are not building standards as defined in Health and Safety Code Section I8909, shall not be construed as part of the provisions of this code. For nonbuilding standards, orders and regulations, see other titles of the California Code of Regulations.
1.1.7 Order of precedence and use.
1.1. 7.1 Differences. In the event of any differences between these building standards and the standard refer≠ence documents, the text of these building standards shall govern.
0
1.1. 7.2 Specific provisions. Where a specific provision varies from a general provision, the specific provision shall apply.
1.1.7.3 Conflicts. When the requirements of this code con≠flict with the requirements of any other part of the Califor≠nia Building Standards Code, Title 24, the most restrictive requirements shall prevail.

1.1.7.3.1 Detached one-and two-family dwellings.
Detached
one-and two1amily dwellings and town≠houses not more than three stories above grade plane with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall not be required to comply with the more restrictive requirements contained in Title 24, Part 2, the California Building Code, unless the pro≠posed structure( s) exceed the design limitations estab≠lished in the California Residential Code and the code user is specifically directed to use the California Build≠ing Code.

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION


1.1.8 City, county, or city and county amendments, addi≠tions or deletions. The provisions of this code do not limit the authority of a city, county, or city and county governments to establish more restrictive and reasonably necessary differ≠ences to the provisions contained in this code pursuant to complying with Section I.I.8.I. The effective date of amend≠ments, additions or deletions to this code by a city, county, or II city and county filed pursuant to Section I.I.8.I shall be the date filed. However, in no case shall the amendments, addi tions or deletions to this code be effective any sooner than the effective date of this code.
Local modifications shall comply with Health and Safety Code Section I894I.5 for Building Standards Law, Health and Safety Code Section I7958 for State Housing Law or Health and Safety Code Section I3869.7 for Fire Protection Districts.

1.1.8.1 Findings and filings.

I. The city, county, 	or city and county shall make express findings for each amendment, addition or deletion based upon climatic, topographical or geo≠logical conditions.
Exception: Hazardous building ordinances and programs mitigating unreinforced masonry buildings.
2.
The city, county, 	or city and county shall file the amendments, additions or deletions expressly marked and identified as to the applicable findings. Cities, counties, cities and counties, and fire depart≠ments shall file the amendments, additions or dele≠tions, and the findings with the California Building Standards Commission at 2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite I30, Sacramento, CA 95833.

3. 	
Findings prepared by fire protection districts shall be ratified by the local city, county, or city and county and filed with the California Department of Housing and Community Development, Division of Codes and Standards, P. 0. Box I407, Sacramento, CA 95812-I407 or I800 3rd Street, Room 260, Sac≠ramento, CA 958II.




1.1.9 Effective date of this code. Only those standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission that are effective at the time an application for building per≠mit is submitted shall apply to the plans and specifications for, and to the construction performed under, that permit. For the effective dates of the provisions contained. in this code, see the History Note page of this code.
1.1.10 Availability of codes. At least one complete copy each of Titles 8, I9, 20, 24 and 25 with all revisions shall be main≠tained in the office of the building official responsible for the administration and enforcement of this code. Each state department concerned and each city, county, or city and county shall have an up-to-date copy of the code available for public inspection. See Health and Safety Code Section I8942(d) (1) and (2).
1.1.11 Format. This part fundamentally adopts the Interna≠tional Residential Code by reference on a chapter-by-chapter basis. When a specific chapter of the International Residen-
II
5






tial Code is not printed in the code and is marked "Reserved" such chapter of the International Residential Code is not adopted as a portion of this code. When a specific chapter of the International
Residential Code is marked "Not adopted by the State of California " but appears in the code, it may be available for adoption by local ordinance.
Note: Matrix Adoption Tables at the front of each chapter may aid the code user in determining which chapter or sec≠tions within a chapter are applicable to buildings under the authority of a specific state agency, but they are not to be considered regulatory.
1.1.12 Validity. If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, contrary to statute, exceeding the authority of the state as stipulated by statutes or otherwise inoperative, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this code.
SECTION 1.2
Reserved

SECTION 1.3
Reserved

SECTION 1.4
Reserved

SECTION 1.5
Reserved

SECTION 1.6
Reserved

SECTION 1.7
Reserved

SE CTION 1.8
DE PART MENT OF HO USING
AND CO MMUNITY DEVELO PMENT (HCD )

1.8.1 Purpose. The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the occupants and the public by gov≠erning accessibility, erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, conversion, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, occupancy, use, height, court, area, sanitation, ventilation, maintenance and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment.
SECTION 1.8.2
AUTHORITY AND ABBREVIA TIONS




1.8.2.1 General. The Department of Housing and Community Development is authorized by law to promulgate and adopt building standards and regulations for several types of build≠ing applications. The applications under the .authority of the > Department of Housing and Community Development are listed in Sections 1.8.2.1.1 through 1.8.2.1.3.


1.8.2.1.1 Housing construction.
Application-Hotels, motels, lodging houses, apartment
houses, dwellings, dormitories, condominiums, shelters
for homeless persons, congregate residences, employee
housing, factory-built housing and other types of dwell≠
ings containing sleeping accommodations with or without
common toilet or cooking facilities including accessory
buildings, facilities and uses thereto. Sections of this code
which pertain to applications listed in this section are

0

identified using the abbreviation "HCD 1. "
Enforcing agency-Local building department or the
Department of Housing and Community Development.

Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Sections 17040,
17050, 17920.9, 17921, 17921.3, 17921.6, 17921.10,
17922, 17922.6, 17922.12, 17927, 17928, 17959.6, 18300,
18552, 18554, 18620, 18630, 18640, 18670, 18690,
18691, 18865, 18871.3, 18871.4, 18873, 18873.1,
18873.2, 18873.3, 18873.4, 18873.5, 18938.3, 18944.11
and 19990; and Government Code Section 12955.1.

Reference-Health and Safety Code Sections 17000
through 17062.5, 17910 through 17995.5, 18200 through
18700, 18860 through 18874, 19960 through 19997; and

0

Government Code Sections 12955.1 and 12955.1.1.

1.8.2.1.2 Housing accessibility.
Application-"COVERED MULTIFAMILY DWElliNGS"
as defined in Chapter llA of the California Building Code
(CBC) including, but not limited to, lodging houses, dor≠
mitories, timeshares, condominiums, shelters for homeless
persons, congregate residences, apartment houses, dwell≠
ings, employee housing, factory-built housing and other
types of dwellings containing sleeping accommodations
with or without common toilet or cooking facilities.

Disabled access regulations promulgated under HCD
authority are located in Chapter llA of the California
Building Code (CBC) and are identified by the abbrevia≠
tion "HCD l-AC. " The application of such provisions

C)

shall be in conjunction with other requirements of the
Building Standards Code and apply only to newly con≠
structed "COVERED MULTIFAMILY DWELUNGS" as
defined in CBC Chapter llA. "HCD l-AC" applications
include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.
All newly constructed "COVERED MULTIFAMILY DWELUNGS" as defined in CBC Chapter llA.

2. 	
New "COMMON USE AREAS" as defined in CBC Chapter llA serving existing covered multifamily dwellings.



)

3. Additions to existing buildings, where the addition
i '
alone-meets the definition of "COVERED MULTI≠
\'-≠
FAMILY DWELUNGS" as defined in CBC Chapter llA.

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


0
0
0

0

0


.'\\
4.
Common 	use areas serving covered multifamily dwellings.

5. Where any portion of a building's exterior is pre≠served, but the interior of the building is removed, including all structural portions of floors and ceil≠ings, the building is considered a new building for the purpose of determining the application of CBC Chapter llA.



"HCD l-AC" building standards generally do not apply to public use areas or public accommodations such as hotels and motels or public housing. Public use areas, public accommodations, public housing and housing which is publicly funded as defined in the CBC are subject to the Division of the State Architect (DSA≠AC) and are referenced in CBC Section 1.9.1.
Enforcing agency-Local building department or the Department of Housing and Community Development.
Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Sections 17040, 17050, 17920.9, 17921, 17921.3, 17921.6, 17921.10, 17922, 17922.6, 17922.12, 17927, 17928, 17959.6, 18300, 18552, 18554, 18620, 18630, 18640, 18670, 18690, 18691, 18865, 18871.3, 18871.4, 18873, 18873.1, 18873.2, 18873.3, 18873.4, 18873.5, 18938.3, 18944.11 and 19990; and Government Code Section 12955.1.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Sections 17000
through 17062.5, 17910
through 17995.5, 18200 through 18700, 18860 through 18874, 19960 through 19997; and Government Code Sections 12955. 1 and 12955. 1.1.
1.8.2.1.3 Permanent buildings in mobilehome parks and special occupancy parks.
Application-Permanent buildings, and permanent accessory buildings or structures, constructed within
mobilehome parks and special occupancy parks that are under the control and ownership of the park opera≠tor. Sections of this code which pertain to applications listed in this section are identified using the abbrevia≠tion "HCD 2. "
Enforcing agency-The Department of Housing and Community Development, local building department or other local agency that has assumed responsibility for the enforcement of Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1, commencing with Section 18200 for mobilehome parks and Health and Safety Code, Divi≠sion 13, Part 2.3, commencing with Section 18860 for special occupancy parks.
Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Sections 17040, 17050, 17920.9, 17921, 17921.3, 17921.6, 17921.10, 17922, 17922.6, 17922.12, 17927, 17928, 17959.6, 18300, 18552, 18554, 18620, 18630, 18640, 18670, 18690, 18691, 18865, 18871.3, 18871.4, 18873, 18873.1, 18873.2, 18873.3, 18873.4, 18873.5, 18938.3, 18944.11 and 19990; and Government Code Section 12955. 1.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Sections 17000 through 17062.5, 17910 through 17995.5, 18200
'≠
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION





through 18700, 18860 through 18874 and 19960 through 19997; and Government Code Sections 12955.1 and 12955.1.1.

SECTION 1.8.3
II
LOCAL ENFORCING AGENCY


1.8.3.1 Duties and powers. The building department of every city, county, or city and county shall enforce all the provi≠sions of law, this code, and the other rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Housing and Community Development pertaining to the installation, erection,
struction, reconstruction, movement, enlargement, conver≠sion, alteration, repair, removal, demolition or arrangement
of apartment houses, hotels, motels, . lodging houses
and dwellings, including accessory buildings, facilities and uses thereto.
The provisions regulating the erection and construction of dwellings and appurtenant structures shall not apply to exist≠ing structures as to which construction is commenced or approved prior to the effective date of these regulations. Requirements relating to use, maintenance and occupancy
shall apply to all dwellings and appurtenant structures approved for construction or constructed before or after the effective date of this code.
For additional information regarding the use and occu≠pancy of existing buildings and appurtenant structures, see California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, commencing with Article 1, Section 1.
1.8.3.2 Laws, rules and regulations. Other than the building standards contained in this code, and notwithstanding other provisions of law, the statutory authority and location of the laws, rules and regulations to be enforced by local enforcing agencies are listed by statute in Sections 1.8.3.2.1 through
1.8.3.2.5 below:

1.8.3.2.1 State Housing Law. Refer to the State Housing Law, California Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part
1.5, commencing with Section 17910 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchap≠ter 1, commencing with Section 1, for the erection, con≠struction, reconstruction, movement, enlargement, conversion, alteration, repair, removal, demolition or arrangement of apartment houses, hotels, motels, lodging houses and dwellings, including accessory buildings, facilities and uses thereto.
1.8.3.2.2 Mobilehome Parks Act. Refer to the Mobile≠home Parks Act, California Health and Safety Code, Divi≠sion 13, Part 2.1, commencing with Section 18200 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, commencing with Section 1000for mobilehome park administrative and enforcement authority, permits, plans, fees, violations, inspections and penalties both within and outside mobilehome parks.
Exception: Mobilehome parks where the Department ofHousing and Community Development is the enforc≠ing agency.
1.8.3.2.3 Special Occupancy Parks Act. Refer to the Spe≠cial Occupancy Parks Act, California Health and Safety





Code, Division 13, Part 2.3, commencing with Section 18860 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2.2, commencing with Section 2000 for special occupancy park administrative and enforce≠ment authority, permits, fees, violations, inspections and penalties both within and outside of special occupancy parks.
Exception: Special occupancy parks where the Depart≠ment of Housing and Community Development is the enforcing agency.
1.8.3.2.4 Employee Housing Act. Refer to the Employee Housing Act, California Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1, commencing with Section 17000 and Califor≠nia Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 3, commencing with Section 600 for employee housing administrative and enforcement authority, per≠mits, fees, violations, inspections and penalties.
1.8.3.2.5 Factory-Built Housing Law. Refer to the Fac≠tory-Built Housing Law, California Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 6, commencing with Section 19960 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Divi≠sion 1, Chapter 3, Subchapter 1, commencing with Section 3000 for factory-built housing administrative and enforce≠ment authority, permits, fees, violations, inspections and penalties.
SECTION 1.8.4
II
PERMITS, FEES, APPLICATIONS AND INS PECTIONS
1.8.4.1 Permits. A written construction permit shall be obtained from the enforcing agency prior to the erection, construction, reconstruction, installation, moving or altera≠tion of any building or structure.
Exceptions:
.1. 	Work exempt from permits as specified in Chapter 1, Scope and Application, Division II, Administration,
II
Section R105.2.
2. 	Changes, alterations or repairs of a minor nature not affecting structural features, egress, sanitation, safety or accessibility as determined by the enforc≠ing agency.
Exemptions from permit requirements shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of other provisions of law or this code.
1.8.4.2 Fees. Subject to other provisions of law, the govern≠ing body of any city, county, or city and county may prescribe fees to defray the cost of enforcement of rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Housing and Community Development. The amount of the fees shall not exceed the amount reasonably necessary to administer or process per≠mits, certificates, forms or other documents, or to defray the costs of enforcement. For additional information, see State Housing Law, Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1.5, Section 17951 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, Article 3, commencing with Section 6.
8



1.8.4.3 Plan review and time limitations. Subject to other provisions of law, provisions related to plan checking, prohi≠()bition of excessive delays and contracting with or employ≠ment of private parties to perform plan checking are set forth in State Housing Law, Health and Safety Code Section 17960. 1, and for employee housing, in Health and Safety Code Section 17021.
∑

1.8.4.3.1 Retention of plans.
The building department of
every city, county, or city and county shall maintain an
official copy, microfilm, electronic or other type of photo≠
graphic copy of the plans of every building, during the life
of the building, for which the department issued a building
permit.



Exceptions:

1.
Single or multiple dwellings not more than two stories and basement in height.

2.
Garages and other 	structures appurtenant to buildings listed in Exception 1.

3.
Farm or ranch buildings appurtenant to build≠ings listed in Exception 1.

4.
Any one-story building where the span between bearing walls does not exceed 25 feet (7620 mm), except a steel frame or concrete building.





All plans for common interest developments as defined
in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code shall be


retained. For additional information regarding plan
retention and reproduction of plans by an enforcing
agency, see Health and Safety Code Sections 19850
through 19852.



1.8.4.4 /nspections. Construction or work for which a permit II is required shall be subject to inspection by the building offi≠cial, and such construction or work shall remain accessible and
exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or other regulations of the Department of Housing and Com≠munity Development. Required inspections are listed in Chapter 1, Scope and Application, Division II, ∑ Administra≠tion, Sections R109.1.1, R109.1.1.1, R109.1.3, R109.1.4, R109.1.4.1, R109.1.4.2, R109.1.5, R109.1.5.1, R109.1.5.2, R109.1.6, R109.1.6.1 andR109.1.6.2.

SECTION 1.8.5
II
RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR ENFORCE MENT

1.8.5.1 General. Subject to other provisions of law, officers and agents of the enforcing agency may enter and inspect public and private properties to secure compliance with the rules and regulations promlflgated . by the Department of Housing and Community Development. For limitations and additional information regarding enforcement, see the fol≠lowing:



1. For applications subject to the State Housing Law as
referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.1 of this code, refer to
Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1.5, com≠
mencing with Section 17910 and California Code of


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


0

II
0

II
0




Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchap≠ter 1, commencing with Section 1.
2.
For applications subject to the Mobilehome Parks Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.2 of this code, refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1, com≠mencing with Section 18200 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, commenc≠ing with Section 1000.

3.
For applications subject 	to the Special Occupancy Parks Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.3 of this Code, refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.3, commencing with Section 18860 and Califor≠nia Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2.2, commencing with Section 2000.

4.
For applications subject to the Employee Housing Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.4 of this code, refer to , Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1, Section


.
17000 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25,
Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 3, commencing with
Section 600.
5. For applications subject to the Factory-Built Housing Law as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.5 of this code, refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 6, commencing with Sections 19960 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 3, Sub≠chapter 1, commencing with Section 3000.

SECTION 1.8.6
LOCAL MODIFICATION BY
ORDINANCE OR REGULA TION

1.8.6.1 GeneraL Subject to other provisions of law, a city, county, or city and county may make changes to the provi≠sions adopted by the Department of Housing and Community Development. If any city, county, or city and county does not amend, add or repeal by local ordinances or regulations the provisions published in this code or other regulations pro≠mulgated by the Department of Housing and Community Development, those provisions shall be applicable and shall become effective 180 days after publication by the California Building Standards Commission. Amendments, additions and deletions to this code adopted by a city, county, or city and county pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Sec≠tions 17958.5, 17958.7 and 18941.5, together with all appli≠cable portions of this code, shall also become effective 180
days after publication of the California Building Standards Code by the California Building Standards Commission.
1.8.6.2 Findings, filings and rejections of local modifica≠tions. Prior to making any modifications or establishing more restrictive building standards, the governing body shall make express findings and filings, as required by California Health and Safety Code Section 17958. 7, showing that such modifi≠cations are reasonably necessary due to local climatic, geo≠logical or topographical conditions. No modification shall become effective or operative unless the following require≠ments are met:
1. 	The express findings shall be made available as a pub≠lic record.
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION




2.
A copy of the modification and express finding, each document marked to cross-reference the other, shall be filed with the California Building Standards Commis≠sion for a city, county, or city and county and with the Department of Housing and Community Development for fire protection districts.

3.
The California Building Standards Commission has not rejected the modification or change.


Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of fire pro≠tection districts pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 13869.7(a).

SECTION 1.8.7
II
ALTERNATE MATERIALS, DESIGNS, TESTS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION

1.8.7.1 General. The provisions of this code as adopted by the Department of Housing and Community Development are not intended to prevent the use of any alternate material, appliance, installation, device, arrangement, design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code. Consideration and approval of alternates shall comply with Section 1.8.7.2 for local building departments and Sec≠tion 1.8.7.3 for the Department of Housing and Community Development.
1.8. 7.2 Local building departments. The building department of any city, county, or city and county may approve alternates for use in the erection, construction, reconstruction, move≠ment, enlargement, conversion, alteration, repair, removal, demolition or arrangement of an apartment house, hotel, motel, lodging house, dwelling or an accessory structure, except for the following:
1. 	
Structures located in mobilehome parks as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18214.

2.
Structures 	located in special occupancy parks as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18862.43.

3. 	
Factory-built housing as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 19971.


1.8. 7.2.1 Approval of alternates. The consideration and approval of alternates by a local building department shall comply with the following procedures and limita≠tions:
1. 	
The approval shall be granted on a case-by-case basis.

2.
Evidence shall be submitted to substantiate claims that the proposed alternate, in performance, safety and protection of life and health, conforms to, or is at least equivalent to, the standards contained in this code and other rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Housing and Community Development.

3.
The local building department may require 	tests performed by an approved testing agency at the expense of the owner or owner's agent as proof of compliance.


9



4. 	Ifthe proposed alternate is related to accessibility in covered multifamily dwellings or in facilities serving "COVERED MULTIFAMILY DWEUINGS " as defined in CBC Chapter 11A, the proposed alternate must also meet the threshold set for "EQUNALENT FACiliTATION" as defined in CBC Chapter llA.
For additional information regarding approval of alternates by a building department pursuant to the State Housing Law, see California Health and Safety Code Sec≠tion 17951(e) and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1.
1.8.7.3 Department of Housing and Community Develop≠ment. The Department of Housing and Community Develop≠ment may approve alternates for use in the erection, construction, reconstruction,
movement, enlargement, con≠version, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of an apartment house, hotel, motel, lodging house, dwelling or an accessory thereto and permanent buildings in mobilehome parks and special occupancy parks. The consideration and
II
approval of alternates shall comply with the following:
1. 	
The department may require tests at the expense of the owner or owner's agent to substantiate compliance with the California Building Standards Code.


2. 	
The approved alternate shall, for its intended purpose, be at least equivalent in performance and safety to the materials, designs, tests or methods of construction prescribed by this code.



SECTION 1.8.8
II
APPEALS BOARD
1.8.8.1 General. Every city, county, or city and county shall establish a process to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions and determinations made by the enforcing agency relative to the application and interpretation of this code and other regulations governing use, maintenance and change of occupancy. The governing body of any city, county, or city and county may establish a local appeals board and a hous≠ing appeals board to serve this purpose. Members of the appeals board( s) shall not be employees of the enforcing agency and shall be knowledgeable in the applicable building codes, regulations and ordinances as determined by the gov≠erning body of the city, county, or city and county.
Where no such appeals boards or agencies have been established, the governing body of the city, county, or city and county shall serve as the local appeals board or housing appeals board as specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 17920.5 and 17920.6.
1.8.8.2 Definitions. The following terms shall for the pur≠poses of this section have the meaning shown.
HOUSING APPEALS BOARD. The board or agency of a city, county, or city and county which is authorized by the governing body of the city, county, or city and county to hear appeals regarding the requirements of the city, county or city and county relating to the use, maintenance and change of occupancy of buildings and structures, including requirements governing alteration, additions, repair, demolition and moving. In any area in which there
10
is no such board or agency, "Housing Appeals Board"
means the local appeals board having jurisdiction over the
area.

LOCAL APPEALS BOARD. The board or agency of a
city, county, or city and county which is authorized by the

governing body of the city, county, or city and county to
hear appeals regarding the ∑ building requirements of the
city, county, or city and county. In any area in which there
is no such board or agency, "Local Appeals Board"
means the governing body of the city, county, or city and
county having jurisdiction over the area.


1.8.8.3 Appeals. Except as otherwise provided in law, any person, firm or corporation adversely affected by a decision,
order or determination by a city, county, or city and county
0

relating to the application of building standards published in the California Building Standards Code, or any other appli≠cable rule or regulation adopted by the Department of Hous≠ing and Community Development, or any lawfully enacted ordinance by a city, county, or city and county, may appeal the issue for resolution to the local appeals board or housing appeals board as appropriate.


The local appeals board shall hear appeals relating to
new building construction, and the housing appeals board shall hear appeals relating to existing buildings.

SECTION 1.8.9

II
UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES

1.8.9.1 Authority to enforce. Subject to other provisions of law, the administration, enforcement, actions, proceedings, abatement, violations and penalties for unsafe buildings and
structures are contained in the following statutes and regula≠tions:


1. For applications subject to the State Housing Law as
referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.1 of this code, refer to

II
Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1.5, com≠mencing with Section 17910 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchap≠ter 1, commencing with Section 1.

2. For applications subject to the Mobilehome Parks Act
as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.2 of this code, refer to

II
-≠
Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1, com≠


mencing with Section 18200 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, commenc≠ing with Section 1000. ∑
3. For applications subject 	to the Special Occupancy
Parks Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.3 of this

II(.
code, refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.3, commencing with Section 18860 and Califor≠nia Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2.2, commencing with Section 2000.

4. For applications subject to the Employee Housing Act
as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.4 of this code, refer to

II
Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1, commenc≠
ing with Section 17000 and California Code of Regula≠(_)
tions, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 3,
commencing with Section 600.

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

01 5. For applications subject to the Factory-Built Housing Law as referenced in Section 1.8 .. 2.5 of this code, refer
1
0
to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 6, com≠mencing with Section 19960 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 3, Subchap≠ter 1, commencing with Section 3000.
1.8.9.2 Actions and proceedings. Subject to other provisions of law, punishments, penalties and fines for violations of
building standards are contained in the following statutes and regulations:
1. For applications subject to the State Housing Law as
referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.1 of this code, refer to
0 II Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1.5, com≠mencing with Section 17910 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchap-. ter 1, commencing with Section 1.
2. For applications subject to the Mobilehome Parks Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.2 of this code, refer to
II
Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1, com≠mencing with Section 18200 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, commenc≠ing with Section 1000.
3. For applications subject 	to the Special Occupancy Parks Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.3 of this
II

code, refer to the Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.3, commencing with Section 18860 and Califor≠nia Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2.2, commencing with Section 2000.
4. For applications subject to the Employee Housing Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.4 of this code, refer to
II
Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1, commenc≠ing with Section 17000 and California Code of Regula≠tions, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 3, commencing with Section 600.
5. For applications subject to the Factory-Built Housing
II 	Law as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.5 of this code, refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 6, commencing with Section 19960 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 3, Sub≠chapter 1, commencing with Section 3000.

SECTION 1.8. 10 OTHER BUILDING REGULA TIONS
1.8.10.1 Existing structures. Subject to the requirements of California Health and Safety Code Sections 17912, 17920.3, 17922, 17922.3, 17958.8 and 17958.9, provisions relating to existing structures (additions, alterations and repairs) shall only apply as identified in the California Building Code Chapter 34 Matrix Adoption Table under the authority of the Department of Housing and Community Development as
II listed in Sections 1.8.2.1.1 through 1.8.2.1.3 of this code.
1.8.10.2 Moved structures. Subject to the requirements of California Health and Safety Code Sections 17922.3 and 17958.9, provisions relating to a moved residential structure
(_j
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION
are located in CBC Chapter 34 and shall only apply as iden≠tified in the CBC Chapter 34 Matrix Adoption Table under the authority of the Department of Housing and Community Development as listed in Sections 1.8.2.1.1 through 1.8.2.1.3 of this code.
SECTION 1.9 Reserved
SECTION 1.10 Reserved
SECTION 1. 11 OFFICE OF THE STATE FIRE MARSHAL

1.11.1 SFM-Office of the State Fire MarshaL Specific scope of application of the agency responsible for enforce≠ment, the enforcement agency and the specific authority to adopt and enforce such provisions of this code, unless other≠wise stated.


Application. Institutional, educational or any similar occu≠pancy. Any building or structure used or intended for use as an asylum, jail, mental hospital, hospital, sanitarium, home for the aged, children 's nursery, children 's home, school or any similar occupancy of any capacity.
Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.

Assembly or similar place of assemblage. Any theater, dancehall, skating rink, auditorium, assembly hall, meeting hall, nightclub, fair building or similar place of assemblage where 50 or more persons may gather together in a building, room or structure for the purpose of amusement, entertain≠ment, instruction, deliberation, worship, drinking or dining, awaiting transportation, or education.
Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.

Small family day-care homes.

Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Sections
1597.45, 1597.54, 13143 and 17921.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.

lArge family day-care homes.

Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Sections 1597.46, 1597.54 and 17921.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.

Residential facilities and residential facilities for the elderly. Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Section 13133. Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.









Any state institution or other state-owned or state-occupied building. Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Section 13108. Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143. High-rise structures. Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Section 13211. Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.


Motion picture production studios. Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 1.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.
Organized camps.
Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Section 18897.3.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.
Residential. All hotels, motels, lodging houses, apartment houses and dwellings, including congregate residences and buildings and structures accessory thereto. Multiple-story structures existing on January 1, 1975, let for human habita≠tion, including and limited to, hotels, motels and apartment houses, less than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest floor level having building access, wherein rooms used for sleep≠ing are let above the ground floor.
Authority cited-Health and Safety Code

Sections 13143.2 and 17921.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.
Residential care facilities. Certified family care homes, out≠of-home placement facilities, halfway houses, drug and/or alcohol rehabilitation facilities and any building or structure used or intended for use as a home or institution for the hous≠ing of any person of any age when such person is referred to or placed within such home or institution for protective social care and supervision services by any governmental agency.
Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.6.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.
Tents, awnings or other fabric enclosures used in connec≠tion with any occupancy.
Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Section 13116.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.

Fire alarm devices, equipment and . systems in connection with any occupancy. Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Section 13114. Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143. Hazardous materials.
-
Authority citedHealth and Safety Code Section 13143.9.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.
Flammable and combustible liquids. Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.6.
Reference-Health and Safety Code Section 13143.
Public school automatic fire detection, alarm and sprinkler systems.


Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Section 13143
and California Education Code Article 7.5, Sections
17074.50, 17074.52 and 17074.54.

Reference-Government Code Section 11152.5, Health
and Safety Code Section 13143 and California Education
Code Chapter 12.5, Leroy F. Greene School Facilities Act
of 1998, Article 1.




Wildland-Urban interface fire area.
Authority cited-Health and Safety Code Sections 13143,
13108.5(a) and 18949.2(b) and (c) and Government Code
Section 51189.



Reference-Health and Safety Code Sections 13143,
Government Code Sections 51176, 51177, 51178 and
51179 and Public Resources Code Sections 4201 through
4204.

1.11.1.1 Adopting agency identification. The provisions
of this code applicable to buildings identified in this Sub≠
section 1.11.1 will be identified in the Matrix Adoption
Tables under the acronym SFM.

1.11.2 Duties and powers of the enforcing agency.
1.11.2.1 Enforcement.
1.11.2.1.1 The responsibility for enforcement of build≠ing standards adopted by the State Fire Marshal and
0
published in the California Building Standards Code relating to fire and panic safety and other regulations of the State Fire Marshal shall except as provided in Section 1.11.2.1.2 be as follows:
1. 	The city, county, or city and county with jurisdic≠tion in the area affected by the standard or regu≠lation shall delegate the enforcement of the building standards relating to fire and panic safety and other regulations of the State Fire Marshal as they relate to Group R-3 occupan≠cies, as described in Section 1.1.3.1 or CCR, Part 2 California Building Code, Section 310.1, to either of the following:
1.1. The chief of the fire authority 	of the city, county or city and county, or an authorized representative.

1.2. 	
The chief building official of the city, county or city and county, or an authorized repre≠sentative.

2.
The chief of any city or county fire department or of any fire protection district, and authorized representatives, shall enforce within the jurisdic≠tion the building standards and other regulations of the State Fire Marshal, except those described in Item 1 or 4.

3.
The State Fire Marshal shall have authority to enforce the building standards and other regula≠tions of the State Fire Marshal in areas outside of




2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE







corporate cities and districts providing fire pro≠tection services.
4. 	The State Fire Marshal shall have authority to enforce the building standards and other regula≠tions of the State Fire Marshal in corporate cities and districts providing fire protection services on request of the chief fire official or the governing body.

0
5. Any fee charged pursuant to the enforcement authority of this section shall not exceed the esti≠mated reasonable cost of providing the service for which the fee is charged pursuant to Section 66014 of the Government Code.
1.11.2.1.2 Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section
0
13108, and except as otherwise provided in this sec≠tion, building standards adopted by the State Fire Mar≠shal publis_hed in the California Building Standards Code relating to fire and panic safety shall be enforced by the State Fire Marshal in all state-owned buildings, state-occupied buildings and state institutions through≠out the state. Upon the written request of the chief fire official of any city, county, or fire protection district, the State Fire Marshal may authorize such chief fire official and his or her authorized representatives, in their geographical area of responsibility, to make fire prevention 'inspections of state-owned or state-occu≠pied buildings, other than state institutions, for the pur≠pose of enforcing the regulations relating to fire and panic safety adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursu≠ant to this section and building standards relating to fire and pqnic safety published in the California Build≠ing Standards Code. Authorization from the State Fire Marshal shall be limited to those fire departments or fire districts which maintain a fire prevention bureau staffed by paid personnel.

Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13108, any requirement or order made by any chief:fire official who is authorized by the State Fire Marshal to make fire prevention inspections of state-owned or state≠occupied buildings, other than state institutions, may be appealed to the State Fire Marshal. The State Fire Marshal shall, upon receiving an appeal and subject to the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 18945) of Part 2.5 of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, determine if the requirement or order made is reasonably consistent with the fire and panic safety regulations adopted by the State Fire Marshal and building standards relating to fire and panic safety

('\
. published in the California Building Code.
Any person may request a code interpretation from the State Fire Marshal relative to the intent of any reg≠ulation or provision adopted by the State Fire Marshal. When the request relates to a specific project, occu≠pancy or building, the State Fire Marshal shall review the issue with the appropriate local enforcing agency
(_) prior to rendering such code interpretation.


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION
1.11.2.1.3 Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13112, any person who violates any order, rule or reg≠ulation of the State Fire Marshal is guilty of a misde≠meanor punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not less than six months, or by both. A person is guilty of a sep≠arate offense each day during which he or she commits, continues or permits a violation of any provision of, or any order, rule or regulation of, the State Fire Marshal as contained in this code.
Any inspection authority who, in the exercise of his or her authority as a deputy State Fire Marshal, causes any legal complaints to be filed or any arrest to be made shall notify the State Fire Marshal immediately following such action.
1.11.2.2 Right of entry. The fire chief of any city, county or fire protection district, or such person 's authorized repre≠sentative, may enter any state institution or any other state≠owned or state-occupied building for the purpose of prepar≠ing a fire suppression preplanning program or for the pur≠pose of investigating any fire in a state-occupied building.
The State Fire Marshal, his or her deputies or salaried assistants, the chief of any city or county fire department or fire protection district and his or her authorized repre≠sentatives may enter any building or premises not used for dwelling purposes at any reasonable hour for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. The owner, lessee, manager or operator of any such building or premises shall permit the State Fire Marshal, his or her deputies or salaried assis≠tants and the chief of any city or county fire department or fire protection district and his or her authorized represen≠tatives to enter and inspect them at the time and for the purpose stated in this section.
1.11.2.3 More restrictive fire and panic safety building standards.
1.11.2.3.1 Any fire protection district organized pursu≠ant to Health and Safety Code Part 2. 7 (commencing with Section 13800) of Division 12 may adopt building standards relating to fire and panic safety that are more stringent than those building standards adopted by the State Fire Marshal and contained in the Califor≠nia Building Standards Code. For these purposes, the district board shall be deemed a legislative body and the district shall be deemed a local agency. Any changes or modifications that are more stringent than the requirements published in the California Building Standards Code relating to fire and panic safety shall be subject to Section 1.1.8.1.
1.11.2.3.2 Any fire protection district that proposes to adopt an ordinance pursuant to this section shall, not less than 30 days prior to noticing a proposed ordi≠nance for public hearing, provide a copy of that ordi≠nance, together with the adopted findings made pursuant to Section 1.11.2.3.1, to the city, county, or city and county where the ordinance will apply. The city, county, or city and county may provide the district with written comments, which shall become part of the fire protection district's public hearing record.





1.11.2.3.3 The fire protection district shall transmit the adopted ordinance to the city, county, or city and county where the ordinance will apply. The legislative body of the city, county, or city and county may ratify, modify or deny an adopted ordinance and transmit its determination to the district within 15 days of the deter≠mination. Any modification or denial of an adopted ordinance shall include a written statement describing the reasons for any modifications or denial. No ordi≠nance adopted by the district shall be effective until rat≠ification by the city, county, or city and county where the ordinance will apply. Upon ratification of an adopted ordinance, the city, county, or city and county shall file a copy of the findings of the district, and any
findings of the city, county, or city and county, together with the adopted ordinance expressly marked and iden≠tified to which each finding refers, in accordance with Section 1.1.8.1:3.
1.11.2.4 Request for alternate means of protection.
Requests for approval to use an alternative material, assembly or materials, equipment, method of construction, method of installation of equipment or means of protection shall be made in writing to the enforcing agency by the owner or the owner's authorized representative and shall be accompanied by a full statement of the conditions. Suf≠
ficient evidence or proof shall be submitted to substantiate any claim that may be made regarding its conformance. The enforcing agency may require tests and the submis≠sion of a test report from an approved testing organization as set forth in Title 19, California Code of Regulation, to substantiate the equivalency of the proposed alternative means of protection.
When a request for alternate means of protection involves hazardous materials, the authority having juris≠diction may consider implementation of the findings and recommendations identified in a Risk Management Plan (RMP) developed in accordance with Title 19, Division 2, Chapter 4.5, Article 3.
Approval of a request for use of an alternative material, assembly of materials, equipment, method of construction, method of installation of equipment or means of protection made pursuant to these provisions shall be limited to the particular case covered by request and shall not be con≠strued as establishing any precedent for any future request.
1.11.2.5 Appeals. When a request for an alternate means of protection has been denied by the enforcing agency, the applicant may file a written appeal to the State Fire Mar≠shal for consideration of the applicant's proposal. In con≠sidering such appeal, the State Fire Marshal may seek the advice of the State Board of Fire Services. The State Fire Marshal shall, after considering all of the facts presented, including any recommendations of the State Board of Fire Services, determine if the proposal is for the purposes intended, at least equivalent to that specified in these regu≠lations in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety, and shall transmit such findings and
14
any recommendations to the applicant and to the enforcing
agency.



1.11.3 Construction documents.


1.11.3.1 Public schools. Plans and specifications for the
construction, alteration or addition to any building owned,
leased or rented by any public school district shall be sub≠
mitted to the Division of the State Architect.

0

1.11.3.2 Movable walls and partitions. Plans or diagrams
shall be submitted to the enforcing agency for approval
before the installation of, or rearrangement of, any mov≠
able wall or partition in any occupancy. Approval shall be
granted only if there is no increase in the fire hazard.

1.11.3.3 New construction high-rise buildings.
0
1.
Complete plans or specifications, 	or both, shall be prepared covering all work required to comply with new construction high-rise buildings. Such plans and specifications shall be submitted to the enforc≠ing agency having jurisdiction.

2.
All plans and specifications shall be prepared under the responsible charge of an architect or a civil or structural engineer authorized by law to develop construction plans and specifications, or by both such architect and engineer. Plans and specifica≠tions shall be prepared by an engineer duly quali≠fied in that branch of engineering necessary to peiform such services. Administration of the work of construction shall be under the ∑ charge of the responsible architect or engineer except that where


0
plans and specifications involve alterations or repairs, such work of construction may be adminis≠tered by an engineer duly qualified to peiform such services and holding a valid certificate under Chap≠ter 7 (commencing with Section 65700) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code for peifor≠mance of services in that branch of engineering in which said plans, specifications and estimates and work of construction are applicable.

This section shall not be construed as preventing the
design of fire-extinguishing systems by persons holding a
C-16 license issued pursuant to Division 3, Chapter 9,
Business and Professions Code. In such instances, how≠
ever, the responsibility charge of this section shall prevail.



1.11.3.4 Existing high-rise buildings.
1. 	
Complete plans or specifications, or both, shall be prepared covering all work required by Section 3412 for existing high-rise buildings. Such plans or specifications shall be submitted to the enforcing agency having jurisdiction.

2. 	
When new construction is required to conform with the provisions of these regulations, complete plans or specifications, or both, shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. As used in this section, "new construction " is not intended to include repairs, replacements or minor alterations which do not disrupt or appreciably add to or affect the structural aspects of the building.




2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION




0 1.11.3.5 Retention of plans. Refer to Building Standards Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13235, a Law, Health and Safety Code Sections 19850 and 19851 preinspection fee equal to, but not exceeding, the actual for permanent retention of plans. cost of the preinspection services may be charged for a

1.11.4 Fees.

0
1.11.4.1
Other fees. Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13146.2, a city, county or district which inspects a hotel, motel, lodging house or apartment house may charge

and collect a fee for the inspection from the owner of the structure in an amount, as determined by the city, county or district, sufficient to pay its costs of that inspection.

0
1.11.4.2
Large family day-care. Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1597.46, Large Family Day-Care Homes, the local government shall process any required . permit as economically as possible, and fees charged for review shall not exceed the costs of the review and permit


process.
1.11.4.3 High-rise. Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13217, High-rise Structure Inspection: Fees and costs, a local agency which inspects a high-rise structure pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13217 may charge and collect a fee for the inspection from the owner of the high-rise structure in an amount, as determined by the local agency, sufficient to pay its costs of that inspection.
0
0
1.11.4.4 Fire clearance preinspection. Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13235, Fire Clearance Prein≠spection, fee, upon receipt of a request from a prospective licensee of a community care facility, as defined in Section 1502, of a residential care facility for the elderly, as defined in Section 1569.2, or of a child day-care facility, as defined in Section 1596. 750, the local fire enforcing agency, as defined in Section 13244, or State Fire Mar≠shal, whichever has primary jurisdiction, shall conduct a preinspection of the facility prior to the final fire clear≠ance approval. At the time of the preinspection, the pri≠mary fire enforcing agency shall price consultation and interpretation of the fire safety regulations and shall notify the prospective licensee of the facility in writing of the specific fire safety regulations which shall be enforced in order to obtain fire clearance approval. Afee equal to, but not exceeding, the actual cost of the preinspection services may be charged for the preinspection of a facility with a capacity to serve 25 or fewer persons. A fee equal to, but
not exceeding, the actual cost of the pre inspection services may be charged for a preinspection of a facility with a capacity to serve 26 or more persons.
(J
1.11.4.5 Care facilities. The primary fire enforcing agency shall complete the final fire clearance inspection for a community care facility, residential care facility for the
elderly, or child day-care facility within 30 days of receipt of the request for the final inspection, or as of the date the prospective facility requests the final pre licensure inspec≠tion by the State Department of Social Services, whichever is later.


facility with a capacity to serve 25 or less clients. A fee equal to, but not exceeding, the actual cost of the prein≠spection services may be charged for a pre inspection of a facility with a capacity to serve 26 or more clients.
Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13131.5, a reasonable final inspection fee, not to exceed the actual cost of inspection services necessary to complete a final inspection may be charged for occupancies classified as residential care facilities for the elderly (RCFE).
Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1569.84, neither the State Fire Marshal nor any local public entity shall charge any fee for enforcing fire inspection regula≠tions pursuant to state law or regulation or local ordi≠nance, with respect to residential care facilities for the elderly (RCFE) which service six or fewer persons.
1.11.4.6 Requests of the Office of the State Fire Marshal.
Whenever a local authority having jurisdiction requests that the State Fire Marshal perform plan review and/or inspection services related to a building permit, the appli≠cable fees for such shall be payable to the Office of the State Fire Marshal.
1.11.5 Inspections. Work performed subject to the provisions of this code shall comply with the inspection requirements of Sections Rl09.1 through R109.1.6.
1.11.5.1 Existing Group I -1 or R occupancies. Licensed 24-hour care in a Group /-1 or R occupancy in existence and originally classified under previously adopted state codes shall be reinspected under the appropriate previous code, provided there is no change in the use or character which would place the facility in a different occupancy group.
1.11.6 Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued as specified in Section Rll 0.
1.11. 7 Temporary structures and uses. See Section R107.
1.11.8 Service utilities. See Section Rill.
1.11.9 Stop work order. See Section Rl14.

1.11.10 Unsafe buildings, structures and equipment. See Title 24, Part 2, California Building Code, Section 115.

SECTION 1.12
Reserved
SECTION 1.13
Reserved
SECTION 1.14
Reserved






DIVISION II ADMINISTRATION

Division II is not adopted by the Department of Housing and Community Development or the State Fire Marshal except where specifically indicated.





SECTION R101
GENERAL

RlOl.l Title. These provisions shall be known as the Resi≠dential Code for One-and Two-family Dwellings of [NAME OF JURISDICTION], and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code."
R101.2 Scope. The provisions of the California Residential Code for One-and Two-family Dwellings shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replace≠ment, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one-and two-family ∑ dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures.
Exceptions:
1.
Live/work units complying with the requirements of Section 419 of the California Building Code shall be permitted to be built as one-and two-family dwell≠ings or townhouses. Fire suppression required by Section 419.5 of the California Building Code when constructed under the California Residential Code for One-and Two1amily Dwellings shall conform to Section R313.

2.
Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guestrooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the California Residential Code for One-and Two-family Dwellings when equipped with a fire sprinkler system in accordance with Sec≠tion R313.



R101.3 Intent. The purpose of this code is to establish mini≠mum requirements to safeguard the public safety, health and general welfare through affordability, structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, light and venti≠lation, energy conservation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environ≠ment and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.
SECTION R1 02
APPLICABILITY

R102.1 General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific require≠ment shall be applicable. Where, in any specific case, differ≠ent sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
R102.2 Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.
R102.3 Application of references. References to chapter or
section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code.
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of
()the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections R102.4.1
∑

and R102.4.2.


Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would
violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or
appliance, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer's
instructions shall apply.



R102.4.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provi≠
sions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the
provisions of this code shall apply.



Rl02.4.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards.


Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or
standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of
this code, the provisions of this code, as applicable, shall
take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code
or standard.

R102.5 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordi≠nance.
R102.6 Partial invalidity. In the event any part or provision of this code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or pro≠visions.
CJ

R102.7 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifi≠cally covered in this code, the International Property Mainte≠nance Code or the California Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.

R102.7.1 Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions,
alterations or repairs to any structure shall conform to the
requirements for a new structure without requiring the
existing structure to comply with all of the requirements of
this code, unless otherwise stated. Additions, alterations or
repairs shall not cause an existing structure to become
unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building.


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



SECTION R1 03 DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
Rl03.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The department of
building safety is hereby created and the official in charge
thereof shall be known as the building official.
0
R103.2 Appointment. The building official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdic≠
tion.
0
R103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed proce≠dures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other
employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official.
SECTION R1 04 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL
0
R104.1 General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The build≠ing official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.
R104.2 Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection and alteration of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this code.
R104.3 Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.
CJ
R104.4 Inspections. The building official is authorized to make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of
such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority. R104.5 Identification. The building official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code. R104.6 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection-to enforce the provisions of this code, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the struc≠ture or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official or designee is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE DIVISION II ADMINISTRATION

duties imposed by this code, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises be unoccupied, the building official shall frrst make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the rem≠edies provided by law to secure entry.
R104.7 Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for the retention of public records.
R104.8 Liability. The building official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and with≠out malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be ren≠dered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the dis≠charge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the pro≠visions of this code shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceed≠ings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be lia≠ble for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code.
R104.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
R104.9.1 Used materials and equipment. Used materi≠als, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official.
R104.10 Modifications. Wherever there are practical diffi≠culties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifi≠cations for individual cases, provided the building official shall frrst find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in com≠pliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and frre safety or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifi≠cations shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of building safety.
R104.10.1 Flood hazard areas. The building official shall not grant modifications to any provision related to flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1) with≠out the granting of a variance to such provisions by the board of appeals.
R104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifi≠cally prescribed by this code, provided that any such altema≠






DIVISION II ADMINISTRATION
tive has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code. Compliance with the specific performance-based provi≠sions of the California Codes in lieu of specific requirements of this code shall also be permitted as an alternate.
R104.11.1 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evi≠dence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to

substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records.


SECTION R1 05
PERMITS

RlOS.l Required. Any owner or authorized


agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installa≠tion of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit.
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for the following. Exemption from permit require≠ments of this code shall not be ∑ deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the pro≠visions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
Building:
1. 	
One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11.15 m2).

2.
Fences not over 7 feet (2 134 mm) high.

3. 	
Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing
to the top of the wall, unless supporting a sur≠charge.

4. 	
Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1.

5.
Sidewalks and driveways.





6. 	Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
cabinets,
..)counter tops and similar finish work.

7. 	
Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24
inches (610 mm) deep.


8.
Swings and other playground equipment.

9. 	Window awnings supported by an exterior wall
which do not project more than 54 inches (1372




C)
mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.
10. 	Decks not exceeding 200 square feet (18.58 m2) in
area, that are not more than 30 inches (762 mm)
above grade at any point, are not attached to a
dwelling and do not serve the exit door required by

()
Section R311.4.

Electrical:
1.
Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decora≠
tive lighting.


2.
Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not
the outlets therefor.


3. 	
Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices
of the required capacity in the same location.


4.
Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or
equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not
capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.


5.
Minor repair work, including the replacement of
lamps or the connection of approved portable elec≠

trical equipment to approved permanently installed
receptacles.






Gas:
1.
Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appli≠
ances.


2.
Replacement of any minor part that does not alter
approval of equipment or make such equipment
unsafe.


3. 	
Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected
to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected
to a power grid.




Mechanical:
(j
1.
Portable heating appliances.

2.
Portable ventilation appliances.

3.
Portable cooling units.

4. 	
Steam, hot-or chilled-water piping within any heat≠
ing or cooling equipment regulated by this code.


5. 	
Replacement of any minor part that does not alter
approval of equipment or make such equipment
unsafe.


6.
Portable evaporative coolers.

7.
Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10
pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are
actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less.









0 8. Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain≠pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.

0
The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
R105.2.1 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replace≠ments and repairs must be performed in an emergency sit≠uation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official.
0
R105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures,
replacement of lamps or the connection of approved porta≠ble electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include
addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
R105.2.3 Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of genera≠tion, transmission, distribution, metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of pub≠lic service agencies by established right.
(J
R105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the department of building safety for that purpose; Such application shall:
1. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the per≠
mit for which application is made.
I
2. 	Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.

3.
Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended ..

4. 	
Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required in Section Rl06.1.

5.
State the valuation of the proposed work.



6.
Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized
\__) agent.


7. Give such other data and information as required by the building official.


DIVISION II ADMINISTRATION
R105.3.1 Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction docu≠ments do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the require≠ments of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
R105.3.1.1 Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings in flood hazard areas. For applications for reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of exist≠ing buildings or structures located in a flood hazard area as established by Table R301.2(1), the building official shall examine or cause to be examined the con≠struction documents and shall prepare a fmding with
regard to the value of the proposed work. For buildings that have sustained damage of any origin, the value of the proposed work shall include the cost to repair the building or structure to its predamaged condition. If the
building official finds that the value of proposed work equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage has occurred or the improvement is started, the fmding shall be pro≠vided to the board of appeals for a determination of substantial improvement or substantial damage. Appli≠cations determined by the board of appeals to constitute substantial improvement or substantial damage shall require all existing portions of the entire building or structure to meet the requirements of Section R32 2.
R105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
R105.4 Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance ∑Of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provi≠sions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building offi-∑ cial from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The building official is also autho≠rized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in vio≠lation of this
code or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction. R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is com≠
menced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a





DIVISION II ADMINISTRATION
period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifi≠able cause demonstrated.
R105.6 Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete informa≠tion, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code.
R105.7 Placement of permit. The building permit or copy thereof shall be kept on the site of the work until the comple≠tion of the project.
R105.8 Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for the installation or repair of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, for which this code is applicable, to comply with this code.
R105.9 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an applica≠tion has been filed.
SECTION R1 06
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS

R106.1 Submittal documents. Submittal documents consist≠ing of construction documents, and other data shall be sub≠mitted in two or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design profes≠sional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code.
R106.1.1 Information on construction documents. Con≠struction documents shall be drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction doc≠uments shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the loca≠tion, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regUlations, as determined by the building official. Where required by the building official, all braced wall lines, shall be identified on the construction documents and all pertinent informa≠tion including, but not limited to, bracing methods, loca≠tion and length of braced wall panels, foundation requirements of braced wall panels at top and bottom shall be provided.
R106.1.2 Manufacturer's installation instructions.
Manufacturer's installation instructions, as required by

this code, shall be available on the job site at the time of
inspection.

C)

Rl06.1.3 Information for construction in flood hazard
areas. For buildings and structures located in whole or in
part in flood hazard areas as established by Table
R301.2(1), construction documents shall include:

1. Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway bound≠aries and flood zones and the design flood elevation,
0
as appropriate;
2.
The elevation of the proposed lowest floor, includ≠ing basement; in areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), the height of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, above the highest adjacent grade;

3.
The elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member in coastal high hazard areas (V Zone); and

4.
If design flood elevations are not included on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the building official and the applicant shall obtain and reasonably utilize any design flood elevation and floodway data available from other sources.




R106.2 Site plan or plot plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompa≠nied by a site plan showing the size and location of new con≠struction and existing structures on the site and distances from lot lines. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show con≠struction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for per≠mit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted.


R106.3 Examination of documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined construction docu≠ments for code compliance.
R106.3.1 Approval of construction documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction docu≠ments shall be approved in writing or by a stamp which states "REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE." One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be I
\ returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work \) and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his or her authorized representative.


R106.3.2 Previous approvals. This code shall not require
changes in the construction documents, construction or
designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful
permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully
authorized, and the construction of which has been pur≠
sued in good faith within 180 days after the effective date
of this code and has not been abandoned ..



R106.3.3 Phased approval. The building official is
authorized to issue a permit for the construction of founda≠
tions or any other part of a building or structure before the
construction documents for the whole building or structure
have been submitted, provided that adequate information
and detailed statements have been filed complying with






2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder' s own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted.

Rl06.4 Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction docu≠ments, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of con≠struction documents.

()
R106.S Retention of construction documents. One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from
date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws.

SECTION R1 07 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
R107.1 General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.
0
R107.2 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform
to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this
code as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and gen≠eral welfare.

R107.3 Temporary power. The building official is autho≠rized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final ∑certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in NFPA 70.


R107.4 Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be dis≠continued.
SECTION R1 08 FEES
R108.1 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid. Nor shall an amend≠ment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid.
R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or altera≠tions requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority.
R108.3 Building permit valuations. Building permit valua≠tion shall include total value of the work for which a permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing


DIVISION II ADMINISTRATION
equipment and other permanent systems, including materials and labor.
Rl08.4 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the con≠struction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by
a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
R108.S Refunds. The building official is authorized to estab≠lish a refund policy.
Rl08.6 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences work requiring a permit on a build≠ing, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee established by the applicable governing authority that shall be in addition to the required permit fees.
SECTION R1 09
INSPECTIONS


Rl09.1 Types of inspections. For onsite construction, from time to time the building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make or cause to be made any necessary inspections and shall either approve that por≠tion of the construction as completed or shall notify the per≠mit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this code. The enforcing agency upon notifica≠tion of the permit holder or their agent shall within a reason≠able time make the inspections set forth in Sections Rl09.1.1, Rl09.1.1.1, Rl09.1.3, Rl09.1.4, RI09.1.4.1, Rl09.1.4.2, Rl09.1.5, Rl09.1.5.1, Rl09.1.5.2, RI09.1.6, Rl09.1.6.1 and Rl09. 1.6.2.
Note: Reinforcing steel or structural framework of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining the approval of the enforcing agency.
R109.1.1 Foundation inspection. Inspection of the foun dation shall be made after poles or piers are set or trenches or basement areas are excavated and any required forms erected and any required reinforcing steel is in place and supported prior to the placing of concrete. The foundation inspection shall include excavations for thickened slabs intended for the support of bearing walls, partitions, struc≠tural supports, or equipment and special requirements for wood foundations. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job site except where concrete is ready-mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94. Under this circumstance, concrete is not required to be at the job site.
RJ09.1.1.1 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection.
Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduits, piping or other ancillary building trade products
or equipment are installed, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing is installed, including the subfloor.
Rl09.1.2 Plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical sys≠tems inspection. Rough inspection of plumbing, mechani≠cal, gas and electrical systems shall be made prior to covering or concealment, before fixtures or appliances are set or installed, and prior to framing inspection.







Exception: Backfilling of ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in accordance with Section M2105.1 prior to inspection shall be permitted.
R109.1.3 Floodplain inspections. For construction in flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the building offi≠cial shall require submission of documentation, prepared and sealed by a registered design professional, of the ele≠vation of the lowest floor, including basement, required in Section R322.
R109.1.4 Frame and masonry inspection. Inspection of framing and masonry construction shall be made after the roof, masonry, all framing, frrestopping, draftstopping and bracing are in place and after chimneys and vents to be concealed are completed and the rough electrical, plumb≠ing, heating, wires, pipes and ducts are approved.
R109.1.4.1 Moisture content verification. Moisture content of framing members shall be verified in accor≠dance with the California Green Building Standards Code, Chapter 4, Division 4.5.
R109.1.4.2 Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lath≠ing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished.
R109.1.5 Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections above, the building official may make or require any other inspections to ascertain compliance with this code and other laws enforced by the building official.
R109.1.5.1 Fire-resistance-rated construction inspection. Where fire-resistance-rated construction is required between dwelling units or due to location on property, the building official shall require an inspec≠tion of such construction after all lathing and/or wall≠board is in place, but before any plaster is applied, or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and fin≠ished. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire≠resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved.
R109.1.5.2 Special inspections. For special inspec≠tions, see California Building Code, Chapter 17.




R109.2 Inspection agencies. The building official is autho≠rized to accept reports of approved agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability.


R109.3 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or their agent to notify the building official that such work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by this code to provide access to and means for inspection of such work.

R109.4 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without frrst obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official upon notification, shall make the requested inspec≠tions and shall either indicate the portion of the construction
()


that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official.
SECTION R11 0 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY

RllO.l Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certifi≠cate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval
C)of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordi≠nances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.
Exceptions:
1.
Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits under Section R105.2.

2.
Accessory buildings or structures.



R110.2 Change in nse. Changes in the character or use of an existing structure shall not be made except as specified in Sections 3408 and 3409 of the California Building Code.
Rl10.3 Certificate issued. After the building official

\ )

inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of ' ---./ the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the building official shall


R109.1.6 Final inspection. Final inspection shall be made issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the fol≠


)∑.

\ _

after the permitted work is complete and prior to occu≠lowing:
pancy.
1. The building permit number.
R109.1.6.1 Elevation documentation. If located in a
flood hazard area, the documentation of elevations required in Section R322. 1.10 shall be submitted to the building official prior to the fmal inspection.
R109.1.6.2 Operation and maintenance manual. At the time of final inspection, a manual, compact disc, web-based reference or other media acceptable to the enforcing agency shall be placed in the building in accordance with the California Green Building Stan≠dards Code, Chapter 4, Division 4.4.
2.
The address of the structure.

3.
The name and address of the owner.

4.
A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued.

5.
A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the require≠ments of this code.

6.
The name of the building official.


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

0 7. The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.
8.
If 	an automatic sprinkler system is provided ∑and whether the sprinkler system is required.

9. 	
Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.


0

R110.4 Temporary occupancy. The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the per≠mit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid.
RllO.S Revocation. The building official shall, in writing,
suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of this code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code.
SECTION R1 11 SERVICE UTILITIES
0
Rlll.l Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this code for which a permit is required, until approved by the building official.

R111.2 Temporary connection. The building official shall have the authority to authorize and approve the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility, source of energy, fuel or power.

R111.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The build-. ing official shall have the authority to authorize disconnec≠tion of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and the referenced codes and standards set forth in Section R102.4 in case of emergency where nec≠essary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without the approval required by Section Rlll.l or R111.2. The building official shall notify the serving utility and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action if not notified prior to disconnection. The owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter.


SECTION R1 12 BOARD OF APPEALS
R112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building offi≠cial relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The building official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE DIVISION II ADMINISTRATION


rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall ren≠der all decisions and fmdings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official.
R112.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code.
R112.2.1 Determination of substantial improvement in flood hazard areas. When the building official provides a finding required in Section R105.3.1.1, the board of appeals shall determine whether the value of the proposed work constitutes a substantial improvement. A substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilita≠
tion, addition or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the mar≠ket value of the building or structure before the improve≠ment or repair is started. If the building or structure has sustained substantial damage, all repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not include:
1.
Improvements of a building or structure required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code viola≠tions identified by the building official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2.
Any alteration of an historic building or structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the continued designation as an historic building or structure. For the purpose of this exclusion, an his≠toric building is:


2. 1. Listed or preliminarily determined to be eli≠gible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places; or
2.2. Determined by the 	Secretary of the U.S. Department of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined to qualify as an historic district; or
2.3. Designated as historic under a state or local historic preservation program that is approved by the Department of Interior.
R112.2.2 Criteria for issuance of a variance for flood hazard areas. A variance shall be issued only upon:
1.
A showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration or topography of the site render the elevation standards in Section R322 inappropriate.

2.
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship by rendering the lot undevelopable.

3.
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public




DIVISION II ADMINISTRATION
expense, cause fraud on or victimization of the pub≠lic, or conflict with existing local laws or ordi≠nances.
4. 	
A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief, considering the flood haz≠ard.

5. 	
Submission to the applicant of written notice speci≠fying the difference between the design flood eleva≠tion and the elevation to which the building is to be built, stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation, and stating that con≠struction below the design flood elevation increases risks to life and property.



R112.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction.
R112.4 Administration. The building official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board.
SECTION R113
VIOLATIONS

R113.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
R113.2 Notice of violation. The building official is autho≠rized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, exten≠sion, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
R113.3 Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the building official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a pro≠vision of this code or fails to comply with any of the require≠ments thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

SECTION R114 STOP WORK ORDER

R114.1 Notice to owner. Upon notice from the building offi≠cial that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of this code or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner' s agent or to the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work will be permitted to resume.



CJ R114.2 Unlawfnl continuance. Any person who shall con≠tinue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that per≠son is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.
C]





2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE -MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE
