---
chapter: Chapter 4
title: FOUNDATIONS
---
CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE -MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 

CHAPTER 4-FOUNDATIONS

(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.}

CHAPTER 4

∑FOUNDATIONS


SECTION R401
GENERAL

R401.1 Application. The provisions of this chapter shall cmitrol the design and construction of the foundation and
foundation spaces for all buildings. In addition to the provi≠sions of this chapter, the design and construction of founda≠tions in flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1) shall meet the provisions of Section R322. Wood foundations shall be designed and installed in accordance with AF&PA PWF.
Exception: The provisions of this chapter shall be permit≠ted to be used for wood foundations only in the following situations:
1. 	
In buildings that have no more than two floors and a roof.

2.
When interior basement and foundation walls are




constructed at intervals not exceeding 50 feet (15 240 mm).
Wood foundations in Seislnic Design Category D0, D1 or D2 shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice.
R401.2 Requirements. Foundation construction shall be capable of accommodating all loads according to Section R301 and of transmitting the resulting loads to the supporting soil. Fill soils that support footings and foundations shall be designed, installed and tested in accordance with accepted
engineering practice. Gravel fill used as footings for wood
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

and precast concrete foundations shall comply with Section
R403.
Note: See Section R301.1.1.1 for limited-density owner-built rural dwellings.
II

R401.3 Drainage. Surface drainage shall be diverted to a storm sewer conveyance or other approved point of collection that does not create a hazard. Lots shall be graded to drain surface water away from foundation walls. The grade shall fall a niinimum of 6 inches (152 mm) within the first 10 feet (3048 mm).
Exception: Where lot lines, walls, slopes or other physical barriers prohibit 6 inches (152 mm) of fall within 10 feet (3048 mm), drains or swales shall be constructed to ensure drainage away from the structure. Impervious surfaces within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the building foundation shall be sloped a minimum of 2 percent away from the building.

R401.4 Soil tests. Where quantifiable data created by accepted soil science methodologies indicate expansive, com≠pressible, shifting or other questionable soil characteristics are likely to be present, the building official shall determine whether to require a soil test to determine the soil's character≠istics at a particular location. This test shall be done by an approved agency using an approved method.
R401.4.1 Geotechnical evaluation. In lieu of a complete geotechnical evaluation, the load-bearing values in Table R401.4.1 shall be assumed.
119 FOUNDATIONS





TABLE R401 .4.1
PRESUMPTIVE LOAD-BEARING VALUES OF
FOUNDATION MATERIALS"

CLASS OF MATERIAL  LOAD-BEARING PRESSURE (pounds per square foot)  
Crystalline bedrock  12,000  
Sedimentary and foliated rock  4,000  
Sandy gravel and/or gravel (GW and GP)  3,000  
Sand, silty sand, clayey sand, silty gravel and clayey gravel (SW, SP, SM, SC, GM and GC)  2,000  
Clay, sandy clay, silty clay, clayey silt, silt and sandy silt (CL, ML, MH and CH)  1,500b  


investigation if it determines that the recommended
action is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed. As a condition to the building permit, the ordinance shall require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each dwelling. Appeal from such determination shall be to the local appeals board.
R401.4.1.1.4. Liability. A city, county, or city and county or other enforcement agency charged with the administration and enforcement of the provi≠

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.
a. When soil tests are required by Section R401.4, the allowable bearing
sions of Section R401.4.1.1, is not liable for any

capacities of the soil shall be part of the recommendations.
injury which arises out of any act or omission of the

b. Where the building official determines that in-place soils with an
city, county or city and county, or other enforcement

allowable bearing capacity of less than 1 ,500 psf are likely to be present at
agency, or a public employee or any other person structural damage to each dwelling proposed to be constructed on the expansive soil.
R401.4.1.1.3 Approval, building permit conditions, appeal. The building department of each city, county or city and county, or other enforcement agency charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code, shall approve the soil





the site, the allowable bearing capacity shall be determined by a soils investigation.
R401.4.1.1 General and where required for applica≠tions listed in Section 1.8.2.1.1 regulated by the Department of Housing and Community Develop≠ment. Foundations and soils investigations shall be conducted in conformance with Health and Safety Code Sections 17953 through 17957 as summarized below.
R401.4.1.1.1 Preliminary soil report. Each city, county, or city and county shall enact an ordinance which requires a preliminary soil report, prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state. The report shall be based upon adequate test bor≠ings or excavations, of every subdivision, where a tentative and final map is required pursuant to Sec≠tion 66426 of the Government Code.

The preliminary soil report may be waived if the building department of the city, county or city and
county, or other enforcement agency charged with the administration and enforcement of the provi≠sions of Section R401.4.1.1, shall determine that, due to the knowledge such department has as to the soil qualities of the soil of the subdivision or lot, no preliminary analysis is necessary.
R401.4.1.1.2 Soil investigation by lot, necessity, preparation, and recommendations. If the prelimi≠nary soil report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, such ordinance shall require a soil investigation of each lot in the subdivision.
The soil investigation shall be prepared by a civil engineer who is registered in this state. It shall rec≠ommend corrective action which is likely to prevent under Section R401.4.1.1.1, R401.4.1.1.2


R401.4.1.1.3.
R401.4.1.1.5. Alternate procedures. The governing body of any city, county, or city and county may enact an ordinance prescribing an alternate proce≠dure which is equal to or more restrictive than the procedures specified in Sections R401.4.1.1.1, R401.4.1.1.2 and R401.1.1.3.

R401.4.2 Compressible or shifting soil. Instead of a complete geotechnical evaluation, when top or subsoils are compressible or shifting, they shall be removed to a depth and width sufficient to assure stable moisture con≠tent in each active zone and shall not be used as fill or sta≠bilized within each active zone by chemical, dewatering or presaturation.

SECTION R402
MATERIALS


R402.1 Wood foundations.
Wood foundation systems shall
be designed and installed in accordance with the provisions
of this code.


R402.1.1 Fasteners. Fasteners used below grade to attach plywood to the exterior side of exterior basement or crawl≠space wall studs, or fasteners used in knee wall construc≠tion, shall be of Type 304 or 316 stainless steel. Fasteners used above grade to attach plywood and all lumber-to≠lumber fasteners except those used in knee wall construc≠tion shall be of Type 304 or 316 stainless steel, silicon bronze, copper, hot-dipped galvanized (zinc coated) steel nails, or hot-tumbled galvanized (zinc coated) steel nails. Electro-galvanized steel nails and galvanized (zinc coated) steel staples shall not be permitted.











2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

FOUNDATIONS
0

R402.1.2 Wood treatment. All lumber and plywood shall be pressure-preservative treated and dried after treatment in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specifica≠tion A, Use Category 4B and Section 5.2), and shall bear the label of an accredited agency. Where lumber and/or plywood is cut or drilled after treatment, the treated sur≠face shall be field treated with copper naphthenate, the concentration of which shall contain a minimum of 2 per≠
cent copper metal, by repeated brushing, dipping or soaking until the wood absorbs no more preservative.

0
R402.2 Concrete. Concrete shall have a minimum specified compressive strength off'cï as shown in Table R402.2. Con≠crete subject to moderate or severe weathering as indicated in Table R301.2(1) shall be air entrained as specified in Table
R402.2. The maximum weight of fly ash, other pozzolans, silica fume, slag or blended cements that is included in con≠crete mixtures for garage floor slabs and for exterior porches, carport slabs and steps that will be exposed to deicing chemi≠cals shall not exceed the percentages of the total weight of cementitious materials specified in Section 4.4.2 of ACI 318. Materials used to produce concrete and testing thereof shall comply with the applicable standards listed in Chapter 3 of ACI 318 or ACI 332.
R402.3 Precast concrete. Precast concrete foundations shall be designed in accordance with Section R404.5 and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and the manufacturers installation instructions.
R402.3.1 Precast concrete foundation materials. Mate≠
() 	rials used to produce precast concrete foundations shall meet the following requirements.
1. All concrete used in the manufacture of precast con≠
crete foundations shall have a minimum compres≠sive strength of 5,000 psi (34 470 kPa) at 28 days. Concrete exposed to a freezing and thawing envi≠ronment shall be air entrained with a minimum total air content of 5 percent.





2.
Structural reinforcing steel shall meet the require≠ments of ASTM A 615, A 706 or A 996. The mini≠mum yield strength of reinforcing steel shall be 40,000 psi (Grade 40) (276 MPa). Steel reinforce≠ment for precast concrete foundation walls shall have a minimum concrete cover of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm).

3.
Panel-to-panel 	connections shall be made with Grade II steel fasteners.

4.
The 	use of nonstructural fibers shall conform to ASTMC 1116.

5.
Grout used for bedding precast foundations placed upon concrete footings shall meet ASTM C 1107.



SECTION R403
FOOTINGS


R403.1 General. All exterior walls shall be supported on continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete foot≠ings, crushed stone footings, wood foundations, or other approved structural systems which shall be of sufficient design to accommodate all loads according to Section R301 and to transmit the resulting loads to the soil within the limi≠tations as determined from the character of the soil. Footings shall be supported on undisturbed natural soils or engineered fill. Concrete footing shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section R403 or in accor≠dance with ACI 332.






0


TYPE OR LOCATION OF CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION  Weathering Potentialb  
Negligible  Moderate  Severe  
Basement walls, foundations and other concrete not exposed to the weather  2,500  2,500  2,5ooc  
Basement slabs and interior slabs on grade, except garage floor slabs  2,500  2,500  2,5ooc  
Basement walls, foundation walls, exterior walls and other vertical concrete work exposed to the weather  2,500  3,000d  3,000d  
Porches, carport slabs and steps exposed to the weather, and garage floor slabs  2,500  3,000d, e, f  3,5ood, ï, f  

TABLE R402.2
MINIMUM SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF CONCRETE

MINIMUM SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH" (fJ

For SI: 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.
a.
Strength at 28 days psi.

b.
See Table R301.2(1) for weathering potential.

c.
Concrete in these locations that may be subject to freezing and thawing during construction shall be air-entrained concrete in accordance with Footnote d.

d.
Concrete shall be air-entrained. Total air content (percent by volume of concrete) shall be not less than 5 percent or more than 7 percent.

e.
See Section R402.2 for maximum cementitious materials content.

f. 	
For garage floors with a steel-troweled finish, reduction of the total air content (percent by volume of concrete) to not less than 3 percent is permitted if the specified compressive strength of the concrete is increased to not less than 4,000 psi.









FOUNDATIONS
TABLE R403.1
MINIMUM WIDTH OF CONCRETE,
PRECAST OR MASONRY FOOTINGS (inches)8

LOAD-BEARING VALUE OF SOIL (psf)
1,500 2,000 3,000 4,000


Conventional light-frame construction
1-story  12  12  12  12  
2-story  15  12  12  12  
3-story  23  17  12  12  

4-inch brick verieer over light frame or 8-inch hollow concrete masonry
1-story  12  12  12  12  
2-story  21  16  12  12  
3-story  32  24  16  12  

8-lnch solid or fully grouted masonry
1-story  16  12  12  12  
2-story  29  21  14  12  
3-story  42  32  21  16  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.
a. 	Where minimum footing width is 12 inches, use of a single wythe of solid or fully grouted 12-inch nominal concrete masonry units is permitted.
R403.1.1 Minimum size. Minimum sizes for concrete and
masonry footings shall be as set forth in Table R403.1 and Figure R403.1(1). The footing width, W, shall be based on the loadbearing value of the soil in accordance with Table R401.4.1. Spread footings shall be at least 6 inches (152 mm) in thickness, T. Footing projections, P, shall be at least 2 inches (51 mm) and shall not exceed the thickness of the footing. The size of footings supporting piers and columns shall be based on the tributary load and allowable soil pressure in accordance with Table R401.4.1.
Footings for wood foundations shall be in accordance with the details set forth in Section R403.2, and Figures R403.1(2) and R403.1(3).
R403.1.2 Continuous footing in Seismic Design Catego≠ries D0, D1 and D2ï The braced wall panels at exterior walls of buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 shall be supported by continuous footings. All required interior braced wall panels in buildings with plan dimensions greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm) shall also be supported by continuous footings.
∑
∑ R403.1.3 Seismic reinforcing. Concrete footings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, as established in Table R301.2(1), shall have minimum reinforcement. Bottom reinforcement shall be located a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm) clear from the bottom of the footing.
In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 where a construction joint is created between a concrete footing and a stem wall, a minimum of one No. 4 bar shall be installed at not more than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center. The vertical bar shall extend to 3 inches (76 mm) clear of the bottom of the footing, have a standard hook and extend a minimum of 14 inches (357 mm) into the stem wall.
In Seismic Design Categories D0, D
1 and D2 where a grouted masonry stem wall is supported on a: concrete footing and stem wall, a minimum of one No. 4 bar shall
∑be installed at not more than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center.
The vertical bar shall extend to 3 inches (76 mm) clear of
the bottom of the footing and have a standard hook. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 masonry stem walls without solid grout and vertical reinforcing are not permitted.
Exception: In detached one-and two-family dwell≠
ings which are three stories or less in height and con≠
structed with stud bearing walls, isolated plain
concrete footings, supporting columns or pedestals are
permitted.

R403.1.3.1 Foundations with stemwalls. Founda≠
tions with stem walls shall have installed a minimum
of one No. 4 bar within 12 inches (305 mm) of the top
of the wall and one No. 4 bar located 3 inches (76
mm)
to 4 inches (102 mm) from the bottom of the

footing.
R403.1.3.2 Slabs-on-ground with turned-down foot≠
ings. Slabs on ground with turned down footings shall
have a minimum of one No. 4 bar at the top and the bot≠
tom of the footing.
Exception: For slabs-on-ground cast monolithi≠cally with the footing, locating one No. 5 bar or two No. 4 bars in the middle third of the footing depth shall be permitted as an alternative to placement at the footing top and bottom.

Where the slab is not cast monolithically with the
footing, No. 3 or larger vertical dowels with standard
hooks on each end shall be provided in accordance with

0
Figure R403.1.3.2. Standard hooks shall comply with
Section R611.5.4.5.

R403.1.4 Minimum depth. All exterior footings shall be placed at least 12 inches (305 mm) below the undisturbed ground surface. Where applicable, the depth of footings shall also conform to Sections R403.1.4.1 through R403.1.4.2.

R403.1.4.1 Frost protection. Except where otherwise
protected from frost, foundation walls, piers and other
permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be
protected from frost by one or more of the following
methods:

1. 	Extended below the frost line specified in Table R301.2.(1);
(J
2.
Constructing in accordance with Section R403.3;

3.
Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32; or

4.
Erected on solid rock.


Exceptions:

1. Protection of freestanding accessory structures
2
with an area of 600 square feet (56 m ) or less, of light-frame construction, with an eave height of 10 feet (3048 mm) or less shall not be required.
2. Protection of freestanding accessory structures
2with an area of 400 square feet (37 m ) or less, ∑. of other than light-frame construction, with an


201 3 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


eave height of 10 feet (3048 mm) or less shall not be required.
3. Decks not supported by a dwelling need not be provided with footings that extend below the frost line.
Footings shall not bear on frozen soil unless the fro≠zen condition is permanent.
0
()
R403.1.4.2 Seismic conditions. In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, interior footings supporting bearing or bracing walls and cast monolithically with a slab on grade shall extend to a depth of not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below the top of the slab.
R403.1.5 Slope. The top surface of footings shall be level.
The bottom surface of footings shall not have a slope exceeding one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-per≠cent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footings or where the slope of the bottom surface of the footings will exceed one unit vertical in ten units horizontal (10-percent slope). ∑

R403.1.6 Foundation anchorage. Sill plates and walls supported directly on continuous foundations shall be anchored to the foundation in accordance with this section.
Wood sole plates at all exterior walls
on monolithic slabs, wood sole plates of braced wall panels at building interiors on monolithic slabs and all wood sill plates shall be anchored to the foundation with anchor bolts spaced a maximum of 6 feet (1829 mm) on center. Bolts shall be at

1
least /2 inch (12.7 mm) in diameter and shall extend a mini≠mum of 7 inches (178 mm) into concrete or grouted cells of concrete masonry units. A nut and washer shall be tightened on each anchor bolt. There shall be a
minimum of two bolts per plate section :with one bolt located not more than 12 inches (305 mm) or less than seven bolt diameters from ∑each end of the plate section. Interior bearing wall sole plates on monolithic slab foundation that are not part of a braced wall panel . shall be positively anchored with approved fasteners. Sill plates and sole plates shall be pro≠tected against decay and termites where required by Sec≠tions R317 and R318. Cold-formed steel framing systems shall be fastened to wood sill plates or anchored directly to the foundation as required in Section R505.3.1 or R603.3.1.

Exceptions:

1. Foundation anchorage, spaced as required to pro≠
1
vide equivalent anchorage to /2-inch-diameter
(12.7 mm) anchor bolts.
2.
Walls 24 inches (610 mm) total length or shorter connecting offset braced wall panels shall be anchored to the foundation with a minimum of one anchor bolt located in the center third of the plate section and shall be attached to adjacent braced wall panels at corners as shown in item 8 of Table R602.3(1).

3.
Connection of walls 	12 inches (305 mm.) total length or shorter connecting offset braced wall panels to the foundation without anchor bolts shall be permitted. The wall shall be attached to




FOUNDATIONS
adjacent braced wall panels at corners as shown in item 8 of Table R602.3(1).
R403.1.6.1 Foundation anchorage in Seismic Design Categories C, D0, D1 and D2ï In addition to the requirements of Section R403.1.6, the following requirements shall apply to wood light-frame structures in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 and wood light-frame townhouses in Seismic Design Category C.
1.
Plate washers conforming to Section R602.11.1 shall be provided for all anchor bolts over the full length of required braced wall lines except where approved anchor straps are used. Properly sized cut washers shall be permitted for anchor bolts in wall lines not containing braced wall panels.

2.
Interior braced wall plates shall have anchor bolts spaced at not more than 6 feet (1 829 mm) on cen≠ter and located within 12 inches (305 mm) of the ends of each plate section when supported on a continuous foundation.

3.
Interior bearing wall sole plates shall have anchor bolts spaced at not more than 6 feet (1 829 mm) on center and located within 12 inches (305 mm) of the ends of each plate section when supported on a continuous foundation.

4.
The maximum anchor bolt spacing shall be 4 feet (1219 mm.) for buildings over two stories in height.

5.
Stepped cripple walls shall conform to Section R602. 11.2.

6.
Where continuous wood foundations in 	accor≠dance wl.th Section R404.2 are used, the force transfer shall have a capacity equal to or greater than the connections required by Section R602. 11.1 or the braced wall panel shall be con≠nected to the wood foundations in accordance with the braced wall panel-to-floor fastening requirements of Table R602.3(1).


R403.1.7 Footings on or adjacent to slopes. The place≠ment of buildings and structures on or adjacent to slopes steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3-percent slope) shall conform to Sections R403.1.7.1 through R403.1.7.4.
R403.1.7.1 Building clearances from ascending slopes. In general, buildings below slopes shall be set a sufficient distance from the slope to provide protection from slope drainage, erosion and shallow failures. Except as provided in Section R403.1.7.4 and Figure R403.1.7.1, the following criteria will be assumed to provide this protection. Where the existing slope is steeper than one unit vertical in one unit horizontal (100-percent slope), the toe of the slope shall be ∑assumed to be at the intersection of a horizontal plane drawn from the top of the foundation and a plane drawn tangent to the slope at an angle of 45 degrees (0.79 rad) to the horizontal. Where a retaining wall is constructed at the toe of the slope, the height of the slope shall be measured from the top of the wall to the top of the slope.





FOUNDATIONS


MONOLITHIC SLAB WITH INTEGRAL FOOTING

0

E



BASEMENT OR CRAWL SPACE

WITH MASONRY WALL

WITH MASONRY WALL AND AND SPREAD FOOTING SPREAD FOOTING

INTERIOR
INTERIOR
w








E


BASEMENT OR CRAWL SPACE BASEMENT OR CRAWL SPACE WITH CONCRETE WALL AND WITH FOUNDATION WALL SPREAD FOOTING BEARING DIRECTLY ON SOIL
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
FIGURE R403.1(1) CONCRETE AND MASONRY FOUNDATION DETAILS

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



FOUNDATIONS




(J

(J

PRESSURE-PRESERVATIVE TREATED PLYWOOD (SEE TABLE R404.2.3)
6 MIL POLYETHYLENE FILM
6 MIL POLYETHYLENE FILM ON CRUSHED STONE OR GRAVEL BACKFILL
FINISH GRADE SLOPE 1/2 IN.
PER FOOT, MIN. 6 FT FROM


PRESSURE-PRESERVATIVE TREATED 2 x 6 IN. BOTTOM PLATE
PRESSURE-PRESERVATIVE 8 IN. FOOTING PLATE

FOUNDATIONS

PRESSURE-PRESERVATIVE TREATED
18 1N. MIN.
6 MIL POLYETHYLENE FILM
61N.
6 IN. GRAVEL OR CRUSHED STONE (SEE SECTION R403.2)
For Sl: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mil= 0.0254 mm.


PERMANENT WOOD FOUNDATION CRAWL SPACE SECTION

FIELD-APPLIED 2 x 6 IN. TOP PLATE
FLASHING FINISH GRADE SLOPE 112 IN.
PER FOOT, MIN. 6 FT FROM
WALL
PRESSURE-PRESERVATIVE
TREATED 2 x 6 IN. STUD WALL
PRESSURE-PRESERVATIVE TREATED PLYWOOD (SEE TABLE R404.2.3)
PRESSURE-PRESERVATIVE TREATED 2 x 6 IN. BOTTOM PLATE
BELOW FROST LINE

FIGURE R403.1(3)
(_)

\__)





R403.1.7.2 Footing setback from descending slope surfaces. Footings on or adjacent to slope surfaces shall be founded in material with an embedment and setback from the slope surface sufficient to provide vertical and lateral support for the footing without detrimental settle≠ment. Except as provided for in Section R403.1.7.4 and Figure R403.1.7.1, the following setback is deemed adequate to meet the criteria. Where the slope is steeper than one unit vertical in one unit horizontal (lOO-per≠cent slope), the required setback shall be measured from an imaginary plane 45 degrees (0.79 rad) to the horizon≠tal, projected upward from the toe of the slope.
R403.1.7.3 Foundation elevation. On graded sites, the top of any exterior foundation shall extend above the elevation of the street gutter at point of discharge or the inlet of an approved drainage device a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) plus 2 percent. Alternate elevations are permitted subject to the approval of the building official, provided it can be demonstrated that required drainage to the point of discharge and away from the structure is provided at all locations on the site.

R403.1.7.4 Altrnate setback and clearances. Alter≠nate setbacks and clearances are permitted, subject to the approval of the building official. The building offi≠cial is permitted to require an investigation and recom≠mendation of a qualified engineer to demonstrate that the intent of this section has been satisfied. Such an investigation shall include consideration of material, height of slope, slope gradient, load intensity and ero≠
sion characteristics of slope material.


R403.1.8 Foundations on expansive soils. Foundation
and floor slabs for buildings located on expansive soils
shall be designed in accordance with Section 1808.6 of the
California Building Code.
Exception: Slab-on-ground and other foundation sys≠tems which have performed adequately in soil condi≠tions similar to those encountered at the building site


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


FOUNDATIONS


FIGURE R403.1.3.2
DOWELS FOR SLABS-ON-GROUND WITH TURNED-DOWN FOOTINGS






are permitted subject to the approval of the building
0
() official. R403.1.8.1 Expansive soils classifications. Soils meeting all four of the following provisions shall be considered expansive, except that tests to show compli≠ance with Items 1, 2 and 3 shall not be required if the test prescribed in Item 4 is conducted:
1. Plasticity Index (PI) of 15 or greater, determined in accordance with ASTM D 43 18.
0
2. More than 10 percent of the soil particles pass a No. 200 sieve (75 Jliil), determined in accordance with ASTM D 422.
3.
More than 10 percent of the soil particles are less

than 5 micrometers in size, determined in accor≠dance with ASTM D 422.

4.
Expansion Index greater than 20, determined in


accordance with ASTM D 4829. R403.2 Footings for wood foundations. Footings for wood foundations shall be in accordance with Figures R403.1(2)

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
()


For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
and R403.1(3). Gravel shall be washed and well graded. The maximum size stone shall not exceed \ inch (19.1 mm). Gravel shall be free from organic, clayey or silty soils. Sand shall be coarse, not smaller than 1/16-inch (1.6 mm) grains and shall be free from organic, clayey or silty soils. Crushed stone shall have a maximum size of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm).
R403.3 Frost-protected shallow foundations. For buildings where the monthly mean temperature of the building is main≠tained at a minimum of 64∞F (18∞C), footings are not required to extend below the frost line when protected from frost by insulation in accordance with Figure R403.3(1) and Table R403.3(1). Foundations protected from frost in accor≠dance with Figure R403.3(1) and Table R403.3(1) shall not be used for unheated spaces such as porches, utility rooms, garages and carports, and shall not be attached to basements or crawl spaces that are not
maintained at a minimum monthly mean temperature of 64∞F (18∞C).
Materials used below grade for the purpose of insulating footings against frost shall be labeled as complying with ASTM C578.

3'/2 IN. MINIMUM r SLAB THICKNESS

AND SIDES




FIGURE R403.1 .7.1
FOUNDATION CLEARANCE FROM SLOPES


TABLE R403.3(1 )
MINIMUM FOOTING DEPTH AND INSULATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FROST-PROTECTED FOOTINGS IN HEATED BUILDINGS"

AIR FREEZING INDEX ("F-days)b 1,500 or less 2,000 2,500  MINIMUM FOOTING DEPTH, D (inches) 12 14 16  VERTICAL INSULATION R∑VALUEc.d 4.5 5.6 6.7  HORIZONTAL INSULATION R∑VALUEï∑ï  HORIZONTAL INSULATION DIMENSIONS PER FIGURE R403.3(1) (inches)  
Along walls Not required Not required 1.7  At corners Not required Not required 4.9  A B c Not required Not required Not required Not required Not required Not required 12 24 40  
3,000  16  7.8  6.5  8.6  12 24 40  
3,500  16  9.0  8.0  11.2  24 30 60  
4,000  16  10.1  10.5  13.1  24 36 60  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, ∞C = [("F) -32]/1.8.
a. Insulation requirements are for protection against frost damage in heated buildings. Greater values may be required to meet energy conservation standards.
0

b.
See Figure R403.3(2) or Table R403.3(2) for Air Freezing Index values.

c. 	
Insulation materials shall provide the stated minimum R-values under long-term exposure to moist, below-ground conditions in freezing climates. The following R-values shall be used to determine insulation thicknesses required for this application: Type II expanded polystyrene-2.4R per inch; Type IV extruded polystyrene-4.5R per inch; Type VI extruded polystyrene-4.5R per inch; Type IX expanded polystyrene-3.2R per inch; Type X extruded polystyrene-4.5R per inch.

d.
Vertical insulation shall be expanded polystyrene insulation or extruded polystyrene insulation.

e.
Horizontal insulation shall be extruded polystyrene insulation.





HORIZONTAL INSULATION PLAN


For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
u

a. See Table R403.3(1) for required dimensions and R-values for vertical and horizontal insulation and minimum footing depth.



FIGURE R403.3(1)
INSULATION PLACEMENT FOR FROST PROTECTED FOOTINGS IN HEATED BUILDINGS

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



0 0 0 0

w
::rJ
z
;;
::rJmcßm
,.
r
00cm

For Sl: ∞C = [(0F) -32]/1.8.
Note: The air-freezing index is defined as cumulative degree days below 32∞F. It is used as a measure of the combined magnitude and duration of air temperature below freezing. The index was computed over
c: a 12-month period (July-June) for each of the 3,044 stations used in the above analysis. Date from the 1951-80 period were fitted to a Weibull probability distribution to produce an estimate of the 100-z year return period.
.... FIGURE R403.3(2)
z
 AIR-FREEZING INDEX AN ESTIMATE OF THE 100-YEAR RETURN PERIOD en


FOUNDATIONS
TABLE R403.3(2)
AIR-FREEZING INDEX FOR U.S. LOCATIONS BY COUNTY

STATE  1500 or less  2000  AIR-FREEZING INDEX 2500 3000  3500  4000  
Alabama  All counties  - -- - -
Alaska  Ketchikan Gateway, Prince of Wales-Outer Ketchikan (CA), Sitka, Wrangell-Petersburg (CA)  - Aleutians West (CA), Haines, Juneau, Skagway-Hoonah≠-Angoon (CA), Yak:utat  - All counties not listed  
Arizona  All counties  - -- - -
Arkansas  All counties  - -- - -
California  All counties not listed  Nevada, Sierra  -- - -
Colorado  All counties not listed  Archuleta, Custer, Fremont, Huerfano, Las Animas, Ouray, Pitkin, San Miguel  Clear Creek, Conejos, Alamosa, Grand, Jackson, Larimer, Costilla, Dolores, Eagle, Moffat,La Plata, Park, Routt, Rio Blanco, San Juan, Summit Rio Grande  Chaffee, Gunnison, Lake, Saguache  Hinsdale, Mineral  
Connecticut  All counties not listed  Hartford, Litchfield  -- - -
Delaware  All counties  - -- - -
District of Columbia  All counties  - -- - -
Florida  All counties  - -- - -
Georgia  All counties  - -- - -
Hawaii  All counties  - -- - -
Idaho  All counties not listed  Adams, Bannock, Blaine, Clearwater, Idaho, Lincoln, Oneida, Power, Valley, Washington  Bingham, Bonneville, Camas, Bear Lake, Butte, Caribou, Elmore, Custer, Fremont, Franklin, Jefferson, Lemhi Madison, Teton  Clark  -
illinois Indiana  All counties not listed All counties not listed  Boone, Bureau, Cook, Dekalb, DuPage, Fulton, Grundy, Henderson, Henry, Iroquois, Jo Daviess, Kane, Kankakee, Kendall, Knox, La Salle, Lake, Lee, Livingston, Marshall, Mason, McHenry, McLean, Mercer, Peoria, Putnam, Rock Island, Stark, Tazewell, Warren, Whiteside, Will, Woodford Allen, Benton, Cass, Fountain, Fulton, Howard, Jasper, Kosciusko, La Porte, Lake, Marshall, Miami, Newton, Porter, Pulaski, Starke, Steuben, Tippeca≠noe, Tipton, Wabash, Warren, White  Carroll, Ogle, Stephenson, -Winnebago -- -- --

(_)

(J
(_)
C_)


(continued)
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
FOUNDATIONS

0
0
0

0

TABLE R403.3(2)-continued
AIR-FREEZING INDEX FOR U.S. LOCATIONS BY COUNTY

STATE  1500 or less  2000  AIR-FREEZING 2500  INDEX 3000  3500  4000  
Iowa  Appanoose, Davis, Fremont, Lee, Van Buren  All counties not listed  Allamakee, Black Hawk, Boone, Bremer, Buchanan, Buena Vista, Butler, Calhoun, Cerro Gordo, Cherokee, Chickasaw, Clay, Clayton, Delaware, Dubuque, Fayette; Floyd, Franklin, Grundy, Hamilton, Hancock, Hardin, Humboldt, Ida, Jackson, Jasper, Jones, Linn, Marshall, Palo Alto, Plymouth,  Dickinson, Emmet, Howard, Kossuth, Lyon, Mitchell, O'Brien, Osceola, Winneshiek  - -
- Pocahontas, Poweshiek, Sac, Sioux, Story, Tama, Webster, Winnebago, Woodbury, Worth, Wright - - - -
Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine  All counties All counties All counties York  --Knox, Lincoln, Sagadahoc  --Androscoggin, Cumberland, Hancock, Kennebec, Waldo, Washington  --Aroostook, Franklin, Oxford, Penobscot, Piscataquis, Somerset  --- ---
Maryland Massachusetts  All counties All counties not listed  -Berkshire, Franklin, Hampden, Worcester  -- -- -- --
Michigan  Berrien, Branch, Cass, Kalamazoo, Macomb, Ottawa, St. Clair, St. Joseph  All counties not listed  Alger, Charlevoix, Cheboygan, Chippewa, Crawford, Delta, Emmet, Iosco, Kalkaska, Lake, Luce, Mackinac, Menominee, Missaukee, Montmorency, Ogemaw, Osceola,  Baraga, Dickinson, Iron, Keweenaw, Marquette  Gogebic, Houghton, Ontonagon  -
Minnesota  - - Otsego, Roscommon, Schoolcraft, Wexford Houston, Winona  All counties not listed  Aitkin, Big Stone, Carlton, Crow Wing, Douglas, Itasca, Kanabec, Lake, Morrison, Pine, Pope, Stearns, Stevens, Swift, Todd, Wadena  Becker, Beltrami, Cass, Clay, Clearwater, Grant, Hubbard, Kitts on, Koochiching, Lake of the Woods, Mahnomen, Marshall, Norman, Otter Tail, Pennington, Polk, Red Lake, Roseau, St. Louis, Traverse, Wilkin  

\
"-._//
(continued)
FOUNDATIONS
TABLE R403.3(2)-contlnued AIR-FREEZING INDEX FOR U.S. LOCATIONS BY COUNTY
AIR-FREEZING INDEX
STATE
1500 or less 2000 2500 3000 3500
4000

Mississippi 	All counties All counties Atchison, Mercer,
Missouri
not listed Nodaway, Putnam ---≠Big Hom, Carbon,
Carter, Cascade,

Jefferson,
Broadwater, 	Deer Lodge,
Judith Basin,
Golden Valley, 	Falcon, Fergus,
Lewis and Clark,
Granite, Lake, 	Flathead, Gallanting,
Meagher,
Montana Mineral Lincoln, 	Glacier, Madison,
Musselshell,
Missoula, 	Park, Petroleum,
Powder River,
Ravalli, Sanders, 	Ponder, Rosebud,
Powell, Silver Bow,
Sweet Grass 	Teton, Treasure,
Stillwater,
Yellowstone

Westland
Beaverhead,
Blaine,

Daniels, Hill, Chouteau, Custer, Phillips, Richland, Dawson; Garfield, Roosevelt,Liberty, McCone, Sheridan, Valley
Prairie, Toole,
Wibaux


Adams, Banner,
Chase, Cheyenne,
Clay, Deuel, Dundy,
Fillmore, Franklin,
Frontier, Furnas,
Gage, Garden,
Gosper, Harlan,
Hayes, Hitchcock,

Nebraska
Jefferson, Kimball,
Morrill, Nemaha,
Nuckolls, Pawnee,
Perkins, Phelps,
Red Willow,
Richardson, Saline,
Scotts Bluff, Seward,
Thayer, Webster

Boyd, Burt, Cedar, All counties Cuming, Dakota, not listed Dixon, Dodge, ≠Knox, Thurston
Nevada  All counties not listed  Elko, Eureka, Nye, Washoe, White Pine  - - - -
New  - All counties  - - - Carroll, Coos,  
Hampshire  not listed  Grafton  

New Jersey 	All counties
All counties
New Mexico
not listed
Albany, Bronx,
Cayuga, Columbia,
Cortland, Dutchess,
Genessee, Kings,
Livingston, Monroe,
Nassau, New York,

New York Niagara, Onondaga, Ontario, Orange, Orleans, Putnam, Queens, Richmond, Rockland, Seneca, Suffolk, Wayne, Westchester, Yates
Rio Arriba Colfax, Mora, Taos
Clinton, Essex, Franklin, Hamilton, All counties Herkimer, --≠not listed Jefferson, Lewis, St. Lawrence, Warren
North
All counties
Carolina
(continued)
2013 CALIFORNIA RES.IDENTIAL CODE


FOUNDATIONS
TABLE R403.3(2)-continued AIR-FREEZING INDEX FOR U.S. LOCATIONS BY COUNTY
AIR-FREEZING INDEX
STATE
1500 or less 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
Adams, Dickey,
Golden Valley, Het-

North ---Billings, tinger, LaMoure, All counties
Dakota Bowman Oliver, Ransom, not listed
Sargent, Sioux, Slope, Stark

0
Ashland, Crawford,
Defiance, Holmes,
Huron, Knox,

Ohio All counties not Licking, Morrow, ---≠listed
Paulding, Putnam,
Richland, Seneca,
Williams

Oklahoma All counties ----≠
All counties Baker, Crook, Grant, -≠
Oregon
not listed Harney
Berks, Blair,
Bradford, Cambria,
Cameron, Centre,
Clarion, Clearfield,
Clinton, Crawford,

Elk, Forest,
All counties Huntingdon,

Pennsylvania
not listed Indiana, Jefferson,
Lackawanna, Lycom≠ing, McKean, Pike,
Potter,
Susquehanna, Tioga,
Venango, Warren,
Wayne, Wyoming

Rhode Island ∑ All counties ----≠
South
All counties ----≠
Carolina Beadle, Brookings, Brown, Campbell, Codington, Corson,
Bennett, Custer, Bon Homme, Day, Deuel, Fall River, Charles Mix, Edmunds, Faulk,
All counties

South Dakota -Lawrence, Mellette, Davison, Douglas, Grant, Hamlin, ≠
0
not listed
Shannon, Todd, Gregory, Jackson, Kingsbury, Tripp Jones, Lyman Marshall, McPherson,
Perkins, Roberts,
Spink, Walworth

Tennessee All counties ----≠
Texas All counties
Carbon, Daggett, All counties Box Elder, Garfield, Salt Lake, Duchesne, Rich, -≠Utah
not listed Morgan, Weber Summit Sanpete, Uintah, Wasatch
(continued)
( )
\___/
FOUNDATIONS
STATE
1500 or less
-
Vermont
Virginia 	All counties All counties
Washington
not listed West All counties
Virginia
-
Wisconsin
Wyoming Goshen, Platte
TABLE R403.3(2}-continued
AIR-FREEZING INDEX FOR U.S. LOCATIONS BY COUNTY

AIR-FREEZING INDEX
2000
Bennington,
Grand Isle, Rutland,
Windham

-
Chelan, Douglas,
Ferry, Okanogan

-
Kenosha,
Kewaunee, Racine,
Sheboygan,
Walworth

Converse, Crook,
Laramie, Niobrara

2500
Addison,
Chittenden,
Franklin, Orange,
Washington,
Windsor

-
-
-
All counties not listed
Campbell, Carbon,
Hot Springs,
Johnson, Natrona,
Sheridan, Uinta,
Weston

3000
Caledonia, Essex,
Lamoille, Orleans
-
-
-
Ashland, Barron,
Burnett, Chippewa,
Clark, Dunn,
Eau Claire,
Florence, Forest,
Iron, Jackson,
La Crosse,
Langlade,
Marathon, Monroe,
Pepin, Polk,
Portage, Price,
Rust, St. Croix,
Taylor,
Trempealeau,
Vilas, Wood

Albany, Big Hom,
Park, Washakie

3500  4000  
- -
- -
- -
- -
Bayfield, Douglas,  
Lincoln, Oneida,  -
Sawyer, Washburn  
Lincoln,  
Fremont, Teton  Sublette,  
Sweetwater  

0
0

0



2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


INSULATION DETAIL
FLASHING PER SECTION R703.
INSULATION PROTECTION PER SECTION R403.3.2
FINISH GRADE OR CONCRETE
SLAB OF ADJACENT UNHEATED
SLAB-ON-GROUND STRUCTURE

12 1N. MAX.

FOUNDATIONS
FROST-PROTECTED SHAlLOW
FOUNDATION SLAB-QN-GRADE FLOOR PER SECTION 403.3


TO CARRY LOAD OVER
NONLOAD∑BEARING
INSULATION
..

12 1N. MIN.

CONCRETE MASONRY OR NOMINAL 4 IN. SCREEN AND PERMANENT WOOD WASHED GRAVEL OR CRUSHED STONE,FOUNDATION GRADE BEAM DRAINED PER SECTION R403.3.3 OR WALL OF ADJACENT
VERTICAL WALL INSULATION"

UNHEATED STRUCTURE
HORIZONTAL INSULATION"FOOTING AS REQUIRED
0

HORIZONTAL INSULATION PLAN


For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. See Table R403.3(1) for required dimensions and R-values for vertical and horizontal insulation.
FIGURE R403.3{3) INSULATION PLACEMENT FOR FROST-PROTECTED FOOTINGS ADJACENT TO UNHEATED SLAB-ON-GROUND STRUCTURE



FIGURE R403.3(4)
INSULATION PLACEMENT FOR FROST-PROTECTED FOOTINGS ADJACENT TO HEATED STRUCTURE

R403.3.1 Foundations adjoining frost-protected shal≠ing structure. Where the frost-protected shallow foun≠low foundations. Foundations that adjoin frost-protected dation abuts the heated structure, the horizontal shallow foundations shall be protected from frost in accor≠insulation and vertical wall insulation shall extend dance with Section R403.1.4. along the adjoining foundation in accordance with Fig≠ure R403.3(4) a distance of not less than Dimension A


R403.3.1.1 Attachment to unheated slab-on-ground
in Table R403.3(1).

structure. Vertical wall insulation and horizontal insu≠
lation of frost protected shallow foundations that adjoin Exception: Where the frost-protected shallow founda≠
a slab-on-ground foundation that does not have a tion abuts the heated structure to form an inside comer,
monthly mean temperature maintained at a minimum of vertical insulation extending along the adjoining foun≠
64∞F (18∞C) shall be in accordance with Figure dation is not required.
R403.3(3) and Table R403.3(1). Vertical wall insula≠

R403.3.2 Protection of horizontal insulation below

tion shall extend between the frost protected shallow ground. Horizontal insulation placed less than 12 foundation and the adjoining slab foundation. Required inches (305 mm) below the ground surface or that por≠horizontal insulation shall be continuous under the
tion of horizontal insulation extending outward more
adjoining slab foundation and through any foundation

than 24 inches (610 mm) from the foundation edge
0

walls adjoining the frost protected shallow foundation.
shall be protected against damage by use of a concrete
Where insulation passes through a foundation wall, it

slab or asphalt paving on the ground surface directly
shall either be of a type complying with this section and

above the insulation or by cementitious board, plywood
having bearing capacity equal to or greater than the

rated for below-ground use, or other approved materials
structural loads imposed by the building, or the build≠

placed below ground, directly above the top surface of
ing shall be designed and constructed using beams, lin≠

the insulation.

tels, cantilevers or other means of transferring building
R403.3.3 Drainage. Final grade shall be sloped in



loads such that the structural loads of the building do
accordance with Section R401.3. In other than Group I

not bear on the insulation.
Soils, as detailed in Table R405.1, gravel or crushed

R403.3.1.2 Attachment to heated structure. Where a
stone beneath horizontal insulation below ground shall
frost-protected shallow foundation abuts a structure

drain to daylight or into an approved sewer system.
that has a monthly mean temperature maintained at a

R403.3.4 Termite damage. The use of foam plastic in minimum of 64∞F (18∞C), horizontal insulation and areas of "very heavy" termite infestation probability shall vertical wall insulation shall not be required between be in accordance with Section R318.4.


the frost-protected shallow foundation and the adjoin≠







2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


0 R403.4 Footings for precast concrete foundations. Foot≠ings for precast concrete foundations shall comply with Sec≠tion R403 .4.
R403.4.1 Crushed stone footings. Clean crushed stone shall be free from organic, clayey or silty soils. Crushed stone shall be angular in nature and meet ASTM C 33, with the maximum size stone not to exceed 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) and the minimum stone size not to be smaller than 1/16-inch
0

(1.6 mm). Crushed stone footings for precast foundations shall be installed in accordance with Figure R403.4(1) and Table R403.4. Crushed stone footings shall be consolidated using a vibratory plate in a maximum of 8-inch lifts. Crushed stone footings shall be limited to Seismic Design Categories A, B and C.
R403.4.2 Concrete footings. Concrete footings shall be installed in accordance with Section R403.1 and Figure R403.4(2).
SECTION R404
CJ
FOUNDATION AND RETAINING WALLS R404.1 Concrete and masonry foundation walls. Concrete foundation walls shall be selected and constructed in accor≠dance with the provisions of Section R404. 1 .2. Masonry foundation walls shall be selected and constructed in accor≠dance with the provisions of Section R404. 1.1.
R404.1.1 Design of masonry foundation walls. Masonry foundation walls shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the provisions of this section or in accor≠dance with the provisions of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5 or NCMA TR68-A. When TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5, NCMA TR68-A or the provisions of this section are used to design masonry foundation walls, project drawings, typ≠ical details and specifications are not required to bear the


FOUNDATIONS
seal of the architect or engineer responsible for design, unless otherwise required by the state law of the jurisdic≠tion having authority.
R404.1.1.1 Masonry foundation walls. Concrete masonry and clay masonry foundation walls shall be constructed as set forth in Table R404.1.1(1),
R404. 1.1(2), R404. 1.1(3) or R404. 1.1(4) and shall also comply with applicable provisions of Sections R606, R607 and R608. In buildings assigned to Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, concrete masonry and clay masonry foundation walls shall also comply with Section R404. 1.4.1. Rubble stone masonry foundation walls shall be constructed in accordance with Sections R404.1.8 and R607.2.2. Rubble stone masonry walls shall not be used in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2ï
R404.1.2 Concrete foundation walls. Concrete founda≠tion walls that support light-frame walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section, ACI 318, ACI 332 or PCA 100. Concrete founda≠tion walls that support above-grade concrete walls that are within the applicability limits of Section R611.2 shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provi≠sions of this section, ACI 318, ACI 332 or PCA 100. Con≠crete foundation walls that support above-grade concrete walls that are not within the applicability limits of Section R611.2 shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of ACI 318, ACI 332 or PCA 100. When ACI 318, ACI 332, PCA 100 or the provisions of this section are used to design concrete foundation walls, project drawings, typical details and specifications are not required to bear the seal
of the architect or engineer responsible for design, unless otherwise required by the state law of the jurisdiction having authority.

TABLE R403.4
MINIMUM DEPTH OF CRUSHED STONE FOOTINGS (D), (inches)

CJ
(J

(\_/)
LOAD-BEARING VALUE OF SOIL (psf)  
1500  2000  3000  4000  
MH, CH, CL, ML  SC, GC, SM, GM, SP, SW  GP, GW  
Wall width (inches)  Wall width (inches)  Wall width (Inches)  Wall width (inches)  
6  8 10 12  6 8 10 12  6 8 10  12  6  8 10  12  
Conventional light-frame construction  
1-story  1100 plf  6  4  4  4  6  4  4  4  6  4  4  4  6  4  4  4  
2-story  1800 plf  8  6  4  4  6  4  4  4  6  4  4  4  6  4  4  4  
3-story  2900 plf  16  14  12  10  10  8  6  6  6  4  4  4  6  4  4  4  
4-lnch brick veneer over light-frame or 8-lnch hollow concrete masonry  
1-story  1500 plf  6  4  4  4  6  4  4  4  6  4  4  4  6  4  4  4  
2-story  2700 plf  14  12  10  8  10  8  6  4  6  4  4  4  6  4  4  4  
3-story  4000 plf  22  22  20  18  16  14  12  10  10  8  6  4  6  4  4  4  
8-lnch solid or fully grouted masonry  
1-story  2000 plf  10  8  6  4  6  4  4  4  6  4  4  4  6  4  4  4  
2-story  3600 plf  20  18  16  16  14  12  10  8  8  6  4  4  6  4  4  4  
3-story  5300 plf  32  30  28  26  22  22  20  18  14  12  10  8  10  8  6  4  





For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 rnrn, 1 plf = 14.6 N/m, 1 pound per square foot = 47.9 N/m2ï

FIGURE R403.4(1)
BASEMENT OR CRAWL SPACE WITH PRECAST
FOUNDATION WALL BEARING ON CRUSHED STONE

R404.1.2.1 Concrete cross-section. Concrete walls constructed in accordance with this code shall comply with the shapes and minimum concrete cross-sectional dimensions required by Table R611.3. Other types of forming systems resulting in concrete walls not in com≠pliance with this section and Table R611.3 shall be designed in accordance with ACI 318.
R404.1.2.2 Reinforcement for foundation walls.
Concrete foundation walls shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom. Horizontal reinforcement shall be provided in accordance with Table R404.1 .2(1). Vertical reinforcement shall be provided in accordance with Table R404.1.2(2), R404.1.2(3), R404.1.2(4), R404.1.2(5), R404.1.2(6), R404.1.2(7) or R404.1.2(8). Vertical reinforcement for flat basement walls retaining 4 feet (1219 mm) or more of unbalanced backfill is per≠mitted to be determined in accordance with Table R404. 1 .2(9). For basement walls supporting above≠grade concrete walls, vertical reinforcement shall be the greater of that required by Tables R404.1 .2(2) through R404. 1.2(8) or by Section R611.6 for the above-grade wall. In buildings assigned to Seismic Design Category D0, Dor D2, concrete foundation walls shall also com≠
1
ply with Section R404.1.4.2.
R404.1.2.2.1 Concrete foundation stem walls sup≠porting above-grade concrete walls. Foundation stem walls that support above-grade concrete walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this section.
1. 	Stem walls not laterally supported at top. Con≠crete stem walls that are not monolithic with slabs-on-ground or are not otherwise laterally


0
0
0

NS GROUT
FIGURE R403.4(2)
BASEMENT OR CRAWL SPACE WITH PRECAST
FOUNDATION WALL ON SPREAD FOOTING

supported by slabs-on-ground shall comply with this section. Where unbalanced backfill
0
retained by the stem wall is less than or equal to 18 inches (457 mm), the stem wall and above≠grade wall it supports shall be provided with vertical reinforcement in accordance with Sec≠tion R611.6 and Table R611.6(1), R611.6(2) or R611.6(3) for above-grade walls. Where unbal≠anced backfill retained by the stem wall is greater than 18 inches (457 mm), the stem wall and above-grade wall it supports shall be pro≠vided with vertical reinforcement in accordance with Section R611.6 and Table R611.6(4).
2. 	Stem walls laterally supported at top. Concrete stem walls that are monolithic with slabs-on≠ground or are otherwise laterally supported by slabs-on-ground shall be vertically reinforced in accordance with Section R611.6 and Table R611.6(1), R611.6(2) or R611.6(3) for above≠grade walls. Where the unbalanced backfill retained by the stem wall is greater than 18 inches ( 457 mm), the connection between the stem wall and the slab-on-ground, and the por≠tion of the slab-on-ground providing lateral support for the wall shall be designed in accor≠dance with PCA 100 or in accordance with accepted engineering practice. Where the unbalanced backfill retained by the stem wall is greater than 18 inches (457 mm), the minimum



nominal thickness of the wall shall be 6 inches (152 mm).

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


FOUNDATIONS
TABLE R404.1.1(1)
PLAIN MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS

0

MAXIMUM WALL HEIGHT (feet)  MAXIMUM UNBALANCED BACKFILL HEIGHT" (feet)  PLAIN MASONRY" MINIMUM NOMINAL WALL THICKNESS (Inches) Soli classesb GW, GP, SW GM, GC, SM, SC, MH, ML∑CL and SP SM.SC and ML and Inorganic CL  
5  4 5  6 solidd or 8 6 solidd or 8 6 solidd or 8 6 solidd or 8 8 10  
6  4 5 6  6 solidd or 8 6 solidd or 8 6 solidd or 8 6 solidd or 8 8 10 8 10 12  
7  4 5 6 7  6 solidd or 8 8 8 6 solidd or 8 10 10 10 12 10 solidd 12 10 solidd 12 solidd  
4  6 solidd or 8 6 solidd or 8 8  
5  6 solidd or 8 10 12  
8  6  10 12 12 solidd  
7  12 12 solidd Footnote e  
8  10 solidd 12 solidd Footnote e  
4  6 solidd or 8 6 solidd or 8 8  
5  8 10 12  
9  6 7  10 12 12 solidd 12 12 solidd Footnote e  
8  12 solidd Footnote e Footnote e  
9  Footnote e Footnote e Footnote e  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 Pa.
a.
Mortar shall be Type M or S and masonry shall be laid in running bond. Ungrouted hollow masonry units are permitted except where otherwise indicated.

b.
Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

c. 	
Unbalanced backfill height is the difference in height between the exterior finish ground level and the lower of the top of the concrete footing that supports the foundation wall or the interior finish ground level. Where an interior concrete slab-ongrade is provided and is in contact with the interior surface of the foundation wall, measurement of the unbalanced backfill height from the exterior finish ground level to the top of the interior concrete slab is permitted.

d.
Solid grouted hollow units or solid masonry units.

e.
Wall construction shall be in accordance with either Table R404.1.1(2), Table R404.1.1(3), Table R404.1.1(4), or a design shall be provided ..



(J

WALL HEIGHT 6 feet 8 inches  HEIGHT OF UNBALANCED BACKFILLï 4 feet (or less) 5 feet 6 feet 8 inches  MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT AND SPACING (INCHES)"' ï Soil classes and lateral soll loadd(psf per foot below grade) GW, GP, SW and SP soils GM, GC, SM, SM-sC and ML soils SC, ML∑CL and Inorganic CL soils 30 45 60 #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #5 at 48 #6 at 48  
7 feet 4 inches  4 feet (or less) 5 feet 6feet 7 feet 4 inches  #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #4at48 #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #4at48 #4 at 48 #5 at 48 #5 at 48 #5 at 48 #6 at 48 #6 at 40  
4 feet (or less)  #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #4 at 48  
5 feet  #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #4 at 48  
8 feet  6feet  #4 at 48 #5 at 48 #5 at 48  
7 feet  #5 at 48 #6 at 48 #6 at 40  
8 feet  #5 at 48 #6 at 48 #6 at 32  
4 feet (or less)  #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #4 at 48  
5 feet  #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #5 at 48  
8 feet 8 inches  6feet  #4 at 48 #5 at 48 #6 at 48  
7 feet  #5 at 48 #6 at 48 #6 at 40  
8 feet 8 inches  #6 at 48 #6 at 32 #6 at 24  
4 feet (or less)  #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #4 at 48  
5 feet  #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #5 at 48  
9 feet 4 inches  6 feet 7 feet  #4 at 48 #5 at 48 #6 at 48 #5 at 48 #6 at 48 #6 at 40  
8 feet  #6 at 48 #6 at 40 #6 at 24  
9 feet 4 inches  #6 at 40 #6 at 24 #6 at 16  
4 feet (or less)  #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #4 at 48  
5 feet  #4 at 48 #4 at 48 #5 at 48  
6 feet  #4 at 48 #5 at 48 #6 at 48  
lO feet  7 feet  #5 at 48 #6 at 48 #6 at 32  
8 feet  #6 at 48 #6 at 32 #6 at 24  
9 feet  #6 at 40 #6 at 24 #6 at 16  
10 feet  #6 at 32 #6 at 16 #6 at 16  

FOUNDATIONS


TABLE R404.1.1(2) 6-INCH MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCING WHERE d > 5 INCHES"∑"
()
0

0

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/mm.
a.
Mortar shall be Type M or S and masonry shall be laid in running bond.

b.
Alternative reinforcing bar sizes and spacings having an equivalent cross-sectional area of reinforcement per lineal foot of wall' shall be permitted provided the spacing of the reinforcement does not exceed 72 inches.

c.
Vertical reinforcement shall be Grade 60 miuimmn. The distance, d, from the face of the soil side of the wall to the center of vertical reinforcement shall be at least 5. inches.

d.
Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System and design lateral soil loads are for moist conditions without hydrostatic pressure. Refer to Table R405.1.

e.
Unbalanced backfill height is the difference in height between the exterior finish ground level and the lower of the top of the concrete footing that supports the foundation wall or the interior finish ground level. Where an interior concrete slab-on-grade is provided and is in contact with the interior surface of the foundation wall, measurement of the unbalanced backfill height from the exterior finish ground level to the top of the interior concrete slab is permitted.


0




2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


FOUNDATIONS
TABLE R404.1.1(3) 10-INCH MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCING WHERE d > 6.75 1NCHESa,ï
HEIGHT OF WALL HEIGHT UNBALANCED BACKFILLï  MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT AND SPACING (INCHES)b∑ ï Soil classes and later soll loadd (psf per foot below grade) GW, GP, SW and SP soils GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML soils SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL soils 30 45 60  
4 feet (or less) 6 feet 8 inches 5feet 6 feet 8 inches 4 feet (or less) 7 feet 4 inches 5 feet 6feet 7 feet 4 inches  #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #5 at 56 #5 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #5 at 56 #4 at 56 #5 at 56 #6 at 56  
4 feet (or less) 5 feet 8 feet 6feet 7 feet 8 feet  #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #5 at 56 #4 at 56 #5 at 56 #6 at 56 #5 at 56 #6 at 56 #6 at 48  
4 feet (or less) 5 feet 8 feet 8 inches 6feet 7 feet 8 feet 8 inches  #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #5 at 56 #4 at 56 #5 at 56 #6 at 56 #5 at 56 #6 at 48 #6 at 32  
4 feet (or less)  #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56  
5 feet  #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56  
9 feet 4 inches 6feet 7 feet  #4 at 56 #5 at 56 #5 at 56 #4 at 56 #5 at 56 #6at56  
8 feet  #5 at 56 #6 at 56 #6 at 40  
9 feet 4 inches  #6 at 56 #6 at 40 #6 at 24  
4 feet (or less)  #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56  
5 feet  #4 at 56 #4 at 56 #4 at 56  
6feet  #4 at 56 #5 at 56 #5 at 56  
10 feet 7 feet  #5 at 56 #6 at 56 #6 at 48  
8 feet  #5 at 56 #6 at 48 #6 at 40  
9 feet  #6 at 56 #6 at 40 #6 at 24  
10 feet  #6 at 48 #6 at 32 #6 at 24  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot= 0.157 kPa/mm.
a. Mortar shall be Type M or S and masonry shall be laid in ruuning bond.
b. Alternative reinforcing bar sizes and spacings having an equivalent cross-sectional area of reinforcement per lineal foot of wall shall be permitted provided the spacing of the reinforcement does not exceed 72 inches.
c. Vertical reinforcement shall be Grade 60 minimum. The distance, d, from the face of the soil side of the wall to the center of vertical reinforcement shall be at least 6.75 inches.
d. Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System and design lateral soil loads are for moist conditions without hydrostatic pressure. Refer to Table R405.1.



e. Unbalanced backfill height is the difference in height between the exterior finish ground level and the lower of the top of the concrete footing that supports the foundation wall or the interior finish ground level. Where an interior concrete slab-on-grade is provided and is in contact with the interior surface of the foundation wall, measurement of the unbalanced backfill height from the exterior finish ground level to the top of the interior concrete slab is permitted.



FOUNDATIONS
TABLE R404.1.1(4)
12-INCH MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCING WHERE d > 8.75 INCHESï∑ï

WALL HEIGHT  HEIGHT OF UNBALANCED BACKFILL"  MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT AND SPACING (INCHES)b,c Soil classes and lateral soil loadd (psf per foot below grade) GW, GP, SW and SP soils GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML soils SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL soils 30 45 60  
6 feet 8 inches  4 feet (or less) 5 feet 6 feet 8 inches  #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #5 at 72  
7 feet 4 inches  4 feet (or less) 5 feet 6 feet 7 feet 4 inches  #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #5 at 72 #4 at 72 #5 at 72 #6 at 72  
8 feet  4 feet (or less) 5 feet 6 feet ?feet 8 feet  #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #5 at 72 #4 at 72 #5 at 72 #6 at 72 #5 at 72 #6 at 72 #6 at 64  
8 feet 8 inches  4 feet (or less) 5 feet 6 feet 7 feet 8 feet 8 inches  #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #5 at 72 #4 at 72 #5 at 72 #6 at 72 #5 at 72 #7 at 72 #6 at 48  
9 feet 4 inches  4 feet (or less) 5 feet 6feet ?feet 8 feet 9 feet 4 inches  #4 at 72 #4at 72 #4at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #5 at 72 #5 at 72 #4 at 72 #5 at 72 #6 at 72 #5 at 72 #6 at 72 #6 at 56 #6 at 72 #6 at 48 #6 at 40  
10 feet  4 feet (or less) 5 feet 6 feet 7 feet 8 feet 9 feet 10 feet  #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #4 at 72 #5 at 72 #5 at 72 #4 at 72 #6 at 72 #6 at 72 #5 at 72 #6 at 72 #6 at 48 #6 at 72 #6 at 56 #6 at 40 #6 at 64 #6 at 40 #6 at 32  

0

0


For SI: 1 inch= 25.4 rom, 1 foot = 304.8 rom, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/rom.
a. Mortar shall be Type M or S and masonry shall be laid in running bond.
b. Alternative reinforcing bar sizes and spacings having an equivalent cross-sectional area of reinforcement per lineal foot of wall shall be permitted provided. the spacing of the reinforcement does not exceed 72 inches.
c. 	Vertical reinforcement shall be Grade 60 minimum. The distance, d, from the face of the soil side of the wall to the center of vertical reinforcement shall be at least 8.75 inches.
d. Soil .classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System and design lateral soil loads are for moist conditions without hydrostatic pressure. Refer to Table R405.1.


e. Unbalanced backfill height is the difference in height between the exterior finish ground level and the lower of the top of the concrete footing that supports the foundation wall or the interior finish ground levels. Where an interior concrete slab-on-grade is provided and in contact with the interior surface of the foundation wall, measurement of the unbalanced backfill height is permitted to be measured from the exterior finish ground level to the top of the interior concrete slab is permitted.



TABLE R404.1.2(1) MINIMUM HORIZONTAL REINFORCEMENT FOR CONCRETE BASEMENT WALLS"∑ b


MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED
HEIGHT OF BASEMENT WALL

LOCATION OF HORIZONTAL REINFORCEMENT
(feet)

u



FOUNDATIONS
CJ R404.1.2.2.2 Concrete foundation stem walls sup≠2. Stem walls laterally supported at top. Concrete porting light-frame above-grade walls. Concrete stem walls that are monolithic with slabs-on≠

foundation  stem  walls  that  support  light-frame  ground or are otherwise laterally supported by  
above-grade walls shall be designed and constructed  slabs-on-ground shall be constructed in accor≠
in accordance with this section.  dance  with  Section  R404. 1 .2.  Where  the  

0
unbalanced backfill retained by the stem wall 1. Stem walls not laterally supported at top. Con≠is greater than 48 inches (1219 mm), the con≠crete stem walls that are not monolithic with nection between the stem wall and the slab≠slabs-on-ground or are not otherwise laterally on-ground, and the portion of the slab-on≠supported by slabs-on-ground and retain 48 ground providing lateral support for the wall inches (1219 mm) or less of unbalanced fill, shall be designed in accordance with PCA 100 measured from the top of the wall, shall be or in accordance with accepted engineering
constructed in accordance with Section practice.

R404. 1.2. Foundation stem walls that retain more than 48 inches (1219 mm) of unbalanced R404.1.2.3 Concrete, materials for concrete, and fill, measured from the top of the wall, shall be forms. Materials used in concrete, the concrete itself designed in accordance with Sections and forms shall conform to requirements of this section R404.1.3 and R404.4. or ACI 318.
TABLE R404.1.2(2) MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 6-INCH NOMINAL FLAT CONCRETE BASEMENT WALLSb,c,d,e,g,h, I,J



MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED WALL HEIGHT {feet)  MAXIMUM UNBALANCED BACKFILL HEIGHT' (feet)  MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches) Soli classesï and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth) GW, GP, SW, SP GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL 30 45 60  
4  NR NR NR  
5  NR 6@ 39 6@48  
8  6  5@ 39 6@48 6@ 35  
7  6@48 6@ 34 6@25  
8  6@ 39 6 @25 6@ 18  
4  NR NR NR  
5  NR 5@ 37 6@48  
9  6 7  5@ 36 6 @44 6 @47 6@ 30 6@ 32 6@ 22  
8  6@ 34 6@ 22 6@ 16  
9  6@27 6@ 17 DR  
4  NR NR NR  
5  NR 5@ 35 6@48  
6  6 @48 6@ 41 6@ 30  
10  7  6 @43 6@ 28 6@ 20  
8  6@ 31 6@20 DR  
9  6@24 6@ 15 DR  
10  6@ 19 DR DR  


0


For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0. 1571 kPa2/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.NR = Not required.
a.
Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

b.
Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi and vertical reinforcement being located at the centerline of the wall. See Section R404.1 .2.3.7.2.

c.
Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404. 1.2.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.
Deflection criterion is IJ240, where L is the height of the basement wall in inches.

e.
Interpolation is not permitted.

f.
Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

g.
NR indicates no vertical wall reinforcement is reqnired, except for 6-inch-nominal walls formed with stay-in-place forming systems in which case vertical reinforcement shall be No. 4@48 inches on center.

h.
See Section R404.1.2.2 for minimum reinforcement reqnired for basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

i.
See Table R611.3 for tolerance from nominal thickness permitted for flat walls.

j.
DR means design is required in accordance with the applicable building code, or where there is no code, in accordance with ACI 318.



FOUNDATIONS

R404.1.2.3.1 Compressive strength. The minimum specified compressive strength of concrete,f'c, shall comply with Section R402.2 and shall be not less than 2,500 psi (17.2 MPa) at 28 days in buildings assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B or C and 3000 psi (20.5 MPa) in buildings assigned to Seis≠mic Design Category D0, D1 or D2ï
R404.1.2.3.2 Concrete mixing and delivery. Mix≠ing and delivery of concrete shall comply with ASTM C 94 or ASTM C 685.
R404.1.2.3.3 Maximum aggregate size. The nomi≠nal maximum size of coarse aggregate shall not exceed one-fifth the narrowest distance between sides of forms, or three-fourths the clear spacing between reinforcing bars or between a bar and the side of the form.

Exception: When approved, these limitations shall not apply where removable forms are used
and workability and methods of consolidation
permit concrete to be placed without honeycombs
or voids.



R404.1.2.3.4 Proportioning and slump of con≠crete. Proportions of materials for concrete shall be established to provide workability and consistency to permit concrete to be worked readily into forms and around reinforcement under conditions of place≠

0
ment to be employed, without segregation or exces≠sive bleeding. Slump of concrete placed in removable forms shall not exceed 6 inches (152

mm). 	0
Exception: When approved, the slump is permit≠
ted to exceed 6 inches (152 mm) for concrete
mixtures that are resistant to segregation, and are
in accordance with the form manufacturer's rec≠
ommendations.


TABLE R404.1.2(3)
MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 8-INCH (203 mm) NOMINAL FLAT CONCRETE BASEMENT WALLSb,c,d,o,t,h,l

MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED WALL HEIGHT (feet) 8  MAXIMUM UNBALANCED BACKFILL HEIGHT9 (feet) 4  MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches) Soil classesï and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth) GW, GP, SW, SP GM, GC, SM, SM∑SC and ML SC, ML∑CL and inorganic CL 30 45 NR NR 60 NR  
5  NR NR NR  
6  NR NR 6@ 37  
7 8  NR 6@ 36 6 @41 6@ 35 6@ 35 6@ 26  
9 10  4  NR NR NR  
5  NR NR NR  
6 7 8  NR NR NR 6@ 35 6@ 36 6@ 32 6@ 35 6@32 6@ 23  
9 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  6@ 35 6 @25 NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 6@ 35 6@ 35 6@ 29 6@34 6@ 22 6 @27 6@ 17 6@ 18 NR NR 6@ 35 6@ 29 6@ 21 6@ 16 6@ 13  


For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 inch = 25 .4 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot= 0.1571 kPa2/m, 1 pound per square inch= 6.895 kPa. NR = Not required.
a.
Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405 .l.

b.
Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi, concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi and vertical reinforcement being located at the centerline of the wall. See Section R404.1.2.3. 7.2.

c. 	
Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404.1.2.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.
NR indicates no vertical reinforcement is required.

e. 	
Deflection criterion is LJ240, where L is the height of the basement wall in inches.

f. 	
Interpolation is not permitted.

g.
Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

h.
See Section R404.1.2.2 for minimum reinforcement required for basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

i. 	
See Table R611.3 for tolerance from nominal thickness permitted for flat walls.


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


FOUNDATIONS
0 Slump of concrete placed in stay-in-place forms shall exceed 6 inches (152 mm). Slump of concrete shall be determined in accordance with ASTM C 143.
0
R404.1.2.3.5 Consolidation of concrete. Concrete shall be consolidated by suitable means during placement and shall be worked around embedded items and reinforcement and into comers of forms.
Where stay-in-place forms are used, concrete shall be consolidated by internal vibration.
Exception: When approved for concrete to be placed in stay-in-place forms, self-consolidating concrete mixtures with slumps equal to or greater than 8 inches (203 mm) that are specifically designed for placement without internal vibration need not be internally vibrated.
R4041.2.3.6 Form materials and form ties. Forms shall be made of wood, steel, aluminum, plastic, a composite of cement and foam insulation, a compos≠ite of cement and wood chips, or other approved material suitable for supporting and containing con≠crete. Forms shall provide sufficient strength to con≠tain concrete during the concrete placement operation.
Form ties shall be steel, solid plastic, foam plas≠tic, a composite of cement and wood chips, a com≠posite of cement and foam plastic, or other suitable material capable of resisting the forces created by fluid pressure of fresh concrete.
R404.1.2.3.6.1 Stay-in-place forms. Stay-in≠place concrete forms shall comply with this sec≠tion. ∑
1. Surface burning characteristics. The flame≠spread index and smoke-developed index of forming material, other than foam plas≠tic, left exposed on the interior shall com-
TABLE R404.1.2(4)
l

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 1Q.INCH NOMINAL FLAT CONCRETE BASEMENT WALLSb, c, d,., 1ï h,
MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED WALL HEIGHT {feet)  MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches) MAXIMUM UNBALANCED Soli classesï and design lateral soli (psf per foot of depth)BACKFILL HEIGH'fll {feet) GW, GP, SW; SP GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML SC, ML∑CL and inorganic CL 30 45 60  
8 9  4 NR NR NR  
5 NR NR NR  
6 NR NR NR  
7 NR NR NR  
8 6@ 48 6 @35 4 NR NR 6@28 NR  
5 NR NR  
6 NR NR 7 NR NR NR 6@ 31  
8 NR 6@ 31 6@ 28  
9 6@ 37 6@ 28 6@ 24  
10  4 NR NR NR  
5 NR NR NR  
6 NR NR NR  
7 NR NR 6@ 28  
8 NR 6@28 6@28  
9 6@ 33 6@28 6@ 21  
10 6@ 28 6@23 6@ 17  

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0. 1571 kPa%1, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa. NR = Not required.
a.
Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

b.
Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a mininlum yield strength of 60,000 psi concrete with a mininlum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi and vertical reinforcement being located at the centerline of the wall. See Section R404.1.2.3. 7.2.

c. 	
Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404.1.2.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.
NR indicates no vertical reinforcement is required.

e.
Deflection criterion is U240, where Lis the height of the basement wall in inches.

f. 	
Interpolation is not permitted.

g.
Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

h.
See Section R404.1.2.2 for minimum reinforcement required for basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

i. 	
See Table R611.3 for tolerance from nominal thickness permitted for flat walls.


FOUNDATIONS
ply with Section R302. The surface burning 4. Termite hazards. In areas where hazard of
characteristics of foam plastic used in insu≠termite damage is very heavy in accordance
lating concrete forms shall comply with with Figure R301.2(6), foam plastic insula≠
Section R316.3. tion shall be permitted below grade on
foundation walls in accordance with one of



2. Interior covering. Stay-in-place forms con≠the following conditions:
structed of rigid foam plastic shall be pro≠
tected on the interior of the building as 4.1. Where in addition to the
required by Section R316. Where gypsum requirements in Section R318.1, an


CJ
approved method of protecting the
shall be installed with a mechanical fasten≠

board is used to protect the foam plastic, it
foam plastic and structure from
ing system. Use of adhesives in addition to

subterranean termite damage is
mechanical fasteners is permitted. provided.

3. Exterior wall covering. Stay-in-place forms 4.2. The structural members of walls, constructed of rigid foam plastics shall be floors, ceilings and roofs are entirely protected from sunlight and physical dam≠of noncombustible materials or



age by the application of an approved exte≠pressure-preservative-treated wood.
rior wall covering complying with this
code. Exterior surfaces of other stay-in≠	4.3. On the interior side of basement
place forming systems shall be protected in
walls.
accordance with this code.


5. Flat ICF wall system forms shall conform to ASTM E 2634.
TABLE R404.1.2(5)
1

MINIMUM VERTICAL WALL REINFORCEMENT FOR 6-INCH WAFFLE-GRID BASEMENT WALLSb, c, d, e, g, h,



MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED WALL HEIGHT (feet) 	 MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (Inches) MAXIMUM UNBALANCED Soli classesï and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth)BACKFILL HEIGHT' (feet) GW, GP, SW, SP GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL 30 45 60  
8  4 4@48 4@46 6@ 39  
5 4@45 5 @46 6@47  
6 5 @45 6@40 DR  
7 6 @44 DR DR  
8 6@ 32 DR DR  
9  4 4@48 4@46 4@37  
5 4@42 5 @43 6 @44  
6 5 @41 6@ 37 DR  
7 6@ 39 DR DR  
>8 DR; DR DR  
10  4 4 @48 4@46 4@35  
5 4 @40 5 @40 6 @41  
6 5@ 38 6@34 DR  
7 6@ 36 DR DR  
>8 DR DR DR  

0
[)

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 inch = 25 .4 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.1571 kPa2/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.
a.
Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

b.
Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi and vertical reinforcement being located at the centerline of the wall. See Section R404.1.2.3. 7.2.

c. 	
Maxirnum∑ spacings shown are the values calculated for the specified bar size. Where the bar used is Grade 60 and the size specified in the table, the actual spacing in the wall shall not exceed a whole-number multiple of 12mches (i.e., 12, 24, 36 and 48) that is less than or equal to the tabulated spacing. Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404.1.2.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.
Deflection criterion is U240, where Lis the height of the basement wall in inches.

e.
Interpolation is not permitted.

f.
Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

g.
See Section R404. 1 .2.2 for minimum reinforcement required for basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

h.
See Table R611.3 for thicknesses and dimensions of waffle-grid walls.

i.
DR means design is required in accordance with the applicable building code, or where there is no code, in accordance with ACI 318.







2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



R404.1.2.3.7 Reinforcement.
R404.1.2.3.7.1 Steel reinforcement. Steel rein≠
forcement shall comply with the requirements of
ASTM A 615, A 706, or A 996. ASTM A 996
bars produced from rail steel shall be Type R. In
buildings assigned to Seismic Design Category
A, B or C, the minimum yield strength of rein≠
forcing steel shall be 40,000 psi (Grade 40) (276
MPa). In buildings assigned to Seismic Design
Category D0, or D2, reinforcing steel shall

D1
comply with the requirements of ASTM A 706
for low-alloy steel with a minimum yield strength
of 60,000 psi (Grade 60) (414 MPa).

R404.1.2.3. 7.2 Location of reinforcement in
wall. The center of vertical reinforcement in

TABLE R404.1 .2(6)
FOUNDATIONS
basement walls determined from Tables R404.1 .2(2) through R404. 1 .2(7) shall be located at the centerline of the wall. Vertical reinforce≠ment in basement walls determined from Table R404.1 .2(8) shall be located to provide a maxi≠mum cover of 1.25 inches (32 min) measured from the inside face of the wall. Regardless of the table used to determine vertical wall rein≠forcement, the center of the steel shall not vary from the specified location by more than the greater of 10 percent of the wall thickness and \-inch (10 mm). Horizontal and vertical rein≠forcement shall be located in foundation walls to provide the minimum cover required by Section
R404. 1.2.3.7.4.
J

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 8-INCH WAFFLE-GRID BASEMENT WALLSb, ï∑ d, "∑1ï h,I,
MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED WALL HEIGHT (feet) 8  MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (Inches) MAXIMUM UNBALANCED Soil classesï and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth) BACKFILL HEIGHTS (feet) GW, GP, SW, SP GM, GC, SM, SM∑SC and ML SC, ML∑CL and inorganic CL 30 45 4 NR NR 5 NR 5@ 48 60 NR 5 @46  
6 5 @48 5@ 43 7 5 @46 6@43 8 6@48 6@ 32 6@45 6@ 31 6@ 23  
9  4 NR NR 5 NR 5@ 47 6 5 @46 5@ 39 7 5 @42 6@ 38 NR 5 @46 6@ 41 6@28  
8 6@44 6@ 28 6@20  
9 6@ 34 6@ 21 DR  
10  4 NR NR NR  
5 NR 5 @46 5 @44  
6 5 @46 5@ 37 7 5@ 38 6@ 35 6@ 38 6@25  
8 6@ 39 6@25 DR  
9 6@ 30 DR DR  
10 6@ 24 DR DR  

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.1571 kPa2/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.
NR = Not required.

0
a.
Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

b.
Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi and vertical reinforcement being located at the centerline of the wall. See Section R404.1.2.3.7.2.

c. 	
Maximum spacings shown are the values calculated for the specified bar size. Where the bar used is Grade 60 ( 420 MPa) and the size specified in the table, the actual spacing in the wall shall not exceed a whole-number multiple of 12 inches (i.e., 12, 24, 36 and 48) that is less than or equal to the tabulated spacing. Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404.1.2.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.
NR indicates no vertical reinforcement is required.

e.
Deflection criterion is U240, where Lis the height of the basement wall in inches.




f.
Interpolation shall not be permitted.

g.
Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

h.
See Section R404.1.2.2 for minimum reinforcement required for basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

i.
See Table R611.3 for thicknesses and dimensions of waffle-grid walls.

j.
DR means design is required in accordance with the applicable building code, or where there is no code, in accordance with ACI 318.






FOUNDATIONS

R404.1.2.3.7.3 Wall openings. Vertical wall reinforcement required by Section R404.1 .2.2 that is interrupted by wall openings shall have additional vertical reinforcement of the same size placed within 12 inches (305 mm) of each side of the opening.
R404.1.2.3.7.4 Support and cover. Reinforce≠ment shall be secured in the proper location in the forms with tie wire or other bar support system to prevent displacement during the concrete place≠ment operation. Steel reinforcement in concrete cast against the earth shall have a minimum cover of 3 inches (75 mm). Minimum cover for rein≠forcement in concrete cast in removable forms that will be exposed to the earth or weather shall be 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) for No. 5 bars and smaller, and 2 inches (50 mm) for No. 6 bars and larger. For concrete cast in removable forms that will not be exposed to the earth or weather, and for con≠crete cast in stay-in-place forms, minimum cover shall be 3/4 inch (19 mm). The minus tolerance for
TABLE R404.1.2(7)

cover shall not exceed the smaller of one-third the required cover or 3/8 inch (10 mm).


R404.1.2.3.7.5 Lap splices. Vertical and hori≠
zontal wall reinforcement shall be the longest
lengths practical. Where splices are necessary in
reinforcement, the length of lap splice shall be in
accordance with Table R611.5.4.(1) and Figure
R611.5.4(1). The maximum gap between non≠
contact parallel bars at a lap splice shall not
exceed the smaller of one-fifth the required lap
length and 6 inches (152 mm). See Figure
R611.5.4(1).


R404.1.2.3.7.6 Alternate grade of reinforce≠
ment and spacing. Where tables in Section ()
R404.1.2.2 specify vertical wall reinforcement
based on minimum bar size and maximum spac≠
ing, which are based on Grade 60 (414 MPa)
steel reinforcement, different size bars and/or
bars made from a different grade of steel are per≠
mitted provided an equivalent area of steel per
linear foot of wall is provided. Use of Table






MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 6-INCH (152 mm) SCREEN-GRID BASEMENT WALLSb,c,d,e,g,h, l
MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED ∑ WALL HEIGHT (feet)  MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches) MAXIMUM UNBALANCED Soil classes" and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth) BACKFILL HEIGHJf {feet) GW, GP, SW, SP GM, GC, SM, SM-sC and ML SC, ML-CL and Inorganic CL 30 45 60  
8  4 4 @48 4@48 5@ 43  
5 4 @48 5 @48 5@ 37  
6 5@ 48 6@45 6@ 32  
7 6@ 48 DR DR  
8 6@ 36 DR DR  
9  4 4@48 4@48 4@ 41  
5 4@48 5@ 48 6@48  
6 5@ 45 6@ 41 DR  
7 6@ 43 DR DR  
>8 DR DR DR  
10  4 4@ 48 4@48 4@39  
5 4@44 5 @44 6@ 46  
6 5 @42 6@ 38 DR  
7 6 @40 DR DR  
>8 DR DR DR  



For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0. 1571 kPa2/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.
a.
Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405 .1.

b.
Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi, concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi and vertical reinforcement being located at the centerline of the wall. See Section R404. 1.2.3.7.2.

c. 	
Maximum spacings shown are the values calculated for the specified bar size. Where the bar used is Grade 60 and the size specified in the table, the actual spacing in the wall shall not exceed a whole-number multiple of 12 inches (i.e., 12, 24, 36 and 48) that is less than or equal to the tabulated spacing. Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404.1.2.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.
Deflection criterion is U240, where L is the height of the basement wall in inches.

e.
Interpolation is not permitted.

f. 	
Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

g.
See Sections R404.1.2.2 for minimum reinforcement required for basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

h.
See Table R611.3 for thicknesses and dimensions of screen-grid walls.

i. 	
DR means design is required in accordance with the applicable building code, or where there is no code, in accordance with ACI 318.


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE




FOUNDATIONS

TABLE MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 6-, 8-, 10-INCH AND NOMINAL FLAT BASEMENT WALLSb,c,d,e,l,h, l,k.n
MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
MAXIMUM Soil classesï and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth) MAXIMUM UNBALANCED GW, GP, SW, SP GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL WALL BACKFILL 30 45 60HEIGHT
0
HEIGHT"

(feet)
Minimum nominal wall thickness (Inches) 6 8 10 12 6 8 10 12 6 8 10 (feet) 12
4
NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
5 5
NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
4
NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
0
5
NR NR NR NR NR NRI NR NR 4@ 35 NR' NR
6
NR

NR NR NR NR 5 @48 NR NR NR 5@ 36 NR NR
6
NR

4
NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
5
NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 5 @47 NR NR NR
7 6
NR NR NR NR 5 @42 NR NR NR 6@ 43 5 @48 NRI NR
NR NRI NR
6@ 34

NR NR
6@42
6 @48 NR
NR
5 @46
NR

7
5 @46
NRNR

NR
NR

NR NR NR NR NR NR
NR
NR

NR
NR

8  6 7 8 4  4@ 37 5 @40 6 @43 NR  NR 5 @47 NR  NR NRNRINR  NR NR NR NR  5@ 37 6@ 37 6@ 34 NR  NR 5@ 41 6 @43 NR  NR NR' NR NR  NR NR NR NR  6@ 37 6@ 34 6@27 NR  5 @43 6 @43 6@ 32 NR  NR 6@44 NR  NR NR NR NR  
9  5 6 7  NR 4@ 34 5@ 36  NRNRINR  NR NR NR  NR NR NR  4@ 35 6 @48 6@ 34  NRINR 5@ 37  NR NR NR  NR NR NR  5 @40 6@ 36 6@ 33  NR 6@ 39 6@ 38  NRNRI5@ 37  NR NRNRI  

4
NRNR NR NR NR NR

5 5 @43 4@ 38 4 @ 48m
NRNR

(_)

NR
6@ 24 6 @29 8 6@ 38 5 @41

9
6@ 34 6@46
6@ 38 5@ 37 6@ 33 6@ 39

NR
5  NR  NR  NR  NR  4@ 33  NR  NR  5@ 38  NR  NR  NR  
6  5 @48  NRI  NR  NR  6@45  NR  NR  NR  6@ 34  5@ 37  NR  NR  
7  6@47  NR  NR  NR  6@34  6 @48  NR  NR  6@ 30  6@ 35  6@48  NRI  
8  6@34  5@ 38  NR  NR  6@30  6@ 34  6@47  NRI  6@22  6@ 26  6@ 35  6 @45m  
9  6@ 34  6@ 41  4@48  NRI  6@23  6@27  6@ 35  4@ 48m  DR  6@22  6@27  6@ 34  
10  6@ 28  6@ 33  6@45  NR  DR.i  6@ 23  6@ 29  6@ 38  DR  6@ 22  6@22  6@ 28  

6@ 30
NR
6@ 19 6@ 23 6@26 6@ 41

6@ 30
6@ 39
NR NR NRNR NR NR NR NR NR

NR
NR

4
10
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot= 0.1571 k:Pa2/m, 1 pound per square inch= 6.895 k:Pa. NR = Not required.
0
a. Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.
b.
Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi.

c.
Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with


Section R404.1.2.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).
d.
NR indicates no vertical wall reinforcement is required, except for 6-inch nominal walls formed with stay-in-place forming systems in which case vertical reinforcement shall be #4@48 inches on center.

e.
Allowable deflection criterion is U240, where L is the unsupported height of the basement wall in inches.



f. Interpolation is not permitted.
g.
Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

h.
Vertical reinforcement shall be located to provide a cover of 1.25 inches measured from the inside face of the wall. The center of the steel shall not vary from the specified location by more than the greater of 10 percent of the wall thickness or 3/8-inch.

i.
Concrete cover for reinforcement measured from the inside face of the wall shall not be less than 3/4-inch. Concrete cover for reinforcement measured from the outside face of the wall shall not be less than 11/2 inches for No. 5 bars and smaller, and not less than 2 inches for larger bars.

j.
DR means design is required in accordance with the applicable building code, or where there is no code in accordance with ACI 318.


0
k. Concrete shall have a specified compressive strength. / ïï of not less than 2,500 psi at 28 days, unless a higher strength is required by footnote 1 or m.
1. The minimum thickness is permitted to be reduced 2 inches, provided the minimum specified compressive strength of concrete,!'., is 4,000 psi.
m. A plain concrete wall with a minimum nominal thickness of 12 inches is permitted, provided minimum specified compressive strength of concrete,!' ïï is
3,500 psi.
n. See Table R611.3 for tolerance from nominal thickness permitted for flat walls.





FOUNDATIONS
TABLE R404.1.2(9) MINIMUM SPACING FOR ALTERNATE BAR SIZE AND/OR ALTERNATE GRADE OF STEELa,b,c
BAR SIZE FROM APPLICABLE TABLE IN SECTION R404.1.2.2
#6 BAR SPACING FROM

APPLICABLE TABLE IN Alternate bar size and/or alternate grade of steel desired SECTION R404.1.2.2
Grade 60 Grade 40 Grade 60 Grade 40 Grade 60 Grade 40 (inches)
#6 #6 #6 #5#6 #6
8  12  
9  14  
16  
11  17  
12  19  
13  20  
14  22  
15  23  
16  25  
17  26  
18  28  
19  29  
31  
21  33  

18 20 22 24 26 29 31 33 35 37 40 42
44
46
Maximum spacing for alternate bar size and/or alternate grade of steel (Inches)
8 12 11 3 8 4 6 2
4 6 9 13 6 13 4 6 9 4 6 3 4 6 7 10 15 6 14 4 7 9 5 7 3 5
7 7 11 16 7 16 5 7 10 5 8 3 5 7 8 12 18 8 17 5 8 11 5 8 4 6 8 9 13 19 8 18 6 9 12 6 9 4 6 9
C)

9 14 21 9 20 6 9 13 6 10 4 7 9
16 22 21 6 14 7 11 5 7
11 17 23 10 23 7 11 15 7 11 5 8 11
11 18 25 11 24 7 11 16 8 12 5 8 11
12 19 26 12 26 8 12 17 8 13 5 8 12
13 20 28 12 27 8 13 18 9 13 6 9 13
13 21 29 13 28 9 13 19 9 14 6 9 13
14 22 31 14 30 9 14 20 10 15 6 10 14

22 48
23 32 14 31 9 21 10 16 7 10
23 36
48
15
15 22 10 16 724 33 10 11 15

CJ


24 37
48
16 25
735 15 10 16 23 11 17 11 16

25 39
48
17 26 37 16
11 17 24 11 18 8 12 17

26  40  48  17  27  38  17  37  11  17  25  12  18  8  12  17  
27  42  48  18  28  40  17  38  12  18  26  12  19  8  13  18  
28  43  48  19  29  41  18  40  12  19  26  13  20  8  13  19  

29 48
19
30 12 19 27 13 20 919 41 14 19
48
31
14 21 944 19 13 28 14

31
9

48
48
21 32
44 13 21 29 14 22 15 21
14

32 48
21 33
48
21 30 15 23 1021 15 21

33 48
22
48
22 31 15 23 1048 21 47 14 16 22

48
23 35 48 22 48 15 23 32 15 24 10 16 23
48
35  48  48  23  36  48  23  48  15  23  33  16  25  11  16  23  
36  48  48  24  37  48  23  48  15  24  34  16  25  11  17  24  
37  48  48  38  48  24  48  16  35  17  26  11  17  

0


38  48  48  25  39  48  48  16  25  36  17  27  12  18  25  
39  48  48  26  40  48  25  48  17  26  37  18  27  12  18  26  
48  48  27  41  48  26  48  17  27  38  18  28  12  19  27  

41 48
48
27 42 48 26 48 18 27
19 29 12 19 27

48
28
42 48 19 30 1348 27 48 18 28 40 20 28
48
29 44 48 28 48 18 29 41 20 30 13 20 29
48
44 48
29
48
19 29 42 20 31 1348 28 48 21 29

19 20 32 14

45 48
48
48 29 48 21
46  48  48  31  48  48  48  20  31  44  21  32  14  22  31  
47  48  48  31  48  48  30  48  20  31  44  21  33  14  22  31  
48  48  48  32  48  48  31  48  21  32  45  22  34  15  23  32  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.
a. 	
This table is for use with tables in Section R404. 1.2.2 that specify the minimum bar size and maximum spacing of vertical wall reinforcement for foundation walls and above-grade walls. Reinforcement specified in tables in Sections R404. 1.2.2 is based on Grade 60 steel reinforcement.

b.
Bar spacing shall not exceed 48 inches on center and shall not be less than one-half the nominal wall thickness.

c.
For Grade steel bars (ASTM A 996, Type R), use spacing for Grade 40 bars or interpolate between Grades 40 and 60.



2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


R404. 1.2(9) is permitted to determine the maxi≠mum bar spacing for different bar sizes than specified in the tables and/or bars made from a different grade of steel. Bars shall not be spaced less than one-half the wall thickness, or more than 48 inches (1219 rom) on center.
R404.1.2.3.7.7 Standard hooks.

rein≠forcement is required by this code to terminate with a standard hook, the hook shall comply with . Section R611.5.4.5 and Figure R611.5.4(3).
R404.1.2.3.7.8 Construction joint reinforce≠ment. Construction joints in foundation walls shall be made and located to not impair the strength of the wall. Construction joints in plain concrete walls, including walls required to have not less than No. 4 bars at 48 inches (1219 rom) on center by Sections R404. 1.2.2 and R404.1.4.2, shall be located at points of lateral support, and a minimum of one No. 4 bar shall extend across the construc≠tion joint at a spacing not to exceed
24 inches (610 rom) on center. Construction joint reinforcement shall have a minimum of 12 inches (305 rom) embedment on both sides of the joint. Construction joints in reinforced concrete walls shall be located in the middle third of the span between lateral sup≠
0

ports, . or located and constructed as required for joints in plain concrete walls.
Exception: Use of vertical wall reinforcement
required by this code is permitted in lieu of construction joint reinforcement provided the spacing does not exceed 24 inches (610 rom), or the combination of wall reinforcement and No.4 bars described above does not exceed 24 inches (610 rom).

R404.1.2.3.8 Exterior wall coverings. Require≠ments for installation of masonry veneer, stucco and other wall coverings on the exterior of concrete walls and other construction details not covered in this section shall comply with the requirements of this code.

R404.1.2.4 Requirements for Seismic Design Cate≠gory C. Concrete foundation walls supporting above≠grade concrete walls in townhouses assigned to Seismic Design Category C shall comply with ACI 318, ACI 332 or PCA 100 (see Section R404.1.2).
R404.1.3 Design required. Concrete or masonry founda≠tion walls shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice when either of the following condi≠tions exists: ∑

1. 	
Walls are subject to hydrostatic pressure from groundwater.

2. 	
Walls supporting more than 48 inches (1219 rom) of unbalanced backfill that do not have permanent lat≠eral support at the top or bottom.



R404.1.4 Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2ï
R404.1.4.1 Masonry foundation walls. In addition to the requirements of Table
R404.1.1(1) plain masonry


FOUNDATIONS
foundation
walls in buildings assigned to Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2, as established in Table R301.2(1), shall comply with the following.
1.
Wall height shall not exceed 8 feet (2438 rom).


2. 	
Unbalanced backfill height shall not exceed 4 feet (1219 rom).

3. 	
Minimum nominal thickness for plain masonry foundation walls shall be 8 inches (203 mm).

4. 	
Masonry stem walls shall have a minimum verti≠cal reinforcement of one No. 3 (No. 10) bar located a maximum of 4 feet (1219 mm) on cen≠ter in grouted cells. Vertical reinforcement shall
be tied the horizontal reinforcement in the footings.


Foundation walls in buildings assigned to Seismic Design Category 00, D1 or D2, as established in Table R301.2(1), supporting more than 4 feet (1219 rom) of unbalanced backfill or exceeding 8 feet (2438 mm) in height shall be constructed in accordance with Table R404.1.1(2), R404.1.1(3) or R404.1.1(4). Masonry foundation walls shall have two No. 4 (No. 13) hori≠zontal bars located in the upper 12 inches (305 mm) of the wall.
R404.1.4.2 Concrete foundation walls. In buildings assigned to Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2, as established in Table R301.2(1), concrete foundation walls that support light-frame walls shall comply with this section, and concrete foundation walls that support above-grade concrete walls shall comply with ACI 318, ACI 332 or PCA 100 (see Section R404.1.2). In addi≠tion to the horizontal reinforcement required by Table R404.1.2(1), plain concrete walls supporting light≠frame walls shall comply with the following.

1.
Wall height shall not exceed 8 feet (2438 rom).


2. 	
Unbalanced backfill height shall not exceed 4 feet (1219 rom).

3. 	
Minimum thickness for plain concrete foundation walls shall be 7.5 inches (191 rom) except that 6 inches (152 rom) is permitted where the maxi≠mum wall height is 4 feet, 6 inches (1372 mm).


Foundation walls less than 7.5 inches (191 mm) in thickness, supporting more than 4 feet (1219 mm) of unbalanced backfill or exceeding 8 feet (2438 mm) in height shall be provided with horizontal reinforcement in accordance with Table R404.1.2(1), and vertical reinforcement in accordance with Table R404.1.2(2}, R404.1.2(3), R404.1.2(4}, R404.1.2(5), R404.1.2(6}, R404.1.2(7) or R404.1.2(8). Where Tables R404.1 .2(2} through R404.1.2(8) permit plain concrete walls, not less than No. 4 (No. 13) vertical bars at a spacing not exceeding 48 inches (1219 mm) shall be provided.
R404.1.5 Foundation wall thickness based on walls supported. The thickness of masonry or concrete founda≠tion walls shall not be less than that required by Section R404.1.5.1 or R404.1.5.2, respectively.






FOUNDATIONS
\\

GALVANIZED OR STAINLESS STEEL STRAPS,
MIN. 2'/,. IN. WIDE BY i2 GAGE THICK,
MIN. 2 IN. FROM EDGE OF PIER, TYP.

\ PIERS SPACED NOT
\

R404.1.5.1 Masonry wall thickness. Masonry founda≠tion walls shall not be less than the thickness of the wall supported, except that masonry foundation walls of at least 8-inch (203 rom) nominal thickness shall be per≠mitted under brick veneered frame walls and under 10≠inch-wide (254 mm) cavity walls where the total height of the wall supported, including gables, is not more than 20 feet (6096 rom), provided the requirements of ∑ Section R404.1.1 are met.
R404.1.5.2 Concrete wall thickness. The thickness of concrete foundation walls shall be equal to or greater than the thickness of the wall in the story above. Con≠crete foundation walls with corbels, brackets or other projections built into the wall for support of masonry veneer or other purposes are not within the scope of the tables in this section.
I
MIN. NINE 16D NAILS PER STRAP
rTREATED SILL PLATE
MIN. TWO 9 GAGE BOX TIES OR TWO MASONRY HEADERS AT 8 IN. O.C. EACH PIER



MIN. 4 IN. MASONRY CURTAIN WALL

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 degree = 0.0175 rad.
FIGURE R404.1.5(1) FOUNDATION WALL CLAY MASONRY CURTAIN WALL WITH CONCRETE MASONRY PIERS
∑∑:J





\_)


)






Where a concrete foundation wall is reduced in thickness to provide a shelf for the support of masonry veneer, the reduced thickness shall be equal to or greater than the thickness of the wall in the story above. Vertical reinforcement for the foundation wall shall be based on Table R404.1.2(8) and located in the wall as required by Section R404.1.2.3.7.2 where that table is used. Vertical reinforcement shall be based on the thickness of the thinner portion of the wall.
Exception: Where the height of the reduced thick≠ness portion measured to the underside of the floor assembly or sill plate above is less than or equal to 24 inches (610 mm) and the reduction in thickness does not exceed 4 inches (102 mm), the vertical reinforcement is permitted to be based on the thicker portion of the wall.



2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


R404.1.5.3 Pier and curtain wall foundations. Use of pier and curtain wall foundations shall be permitted to support light-frame construction not more than two sto≠ries in height, provided the following requirements are met:
1. All load-bearing walls shall be placed on continu≠ous concrete footings placed integrally with the exterior wall footings.

0
2. The minimum actual thickness of a load-bearing masonry wall shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) nominal or 33/8 inches (92 mm) actual thick≠ness, and shall be bonded integrally with piers spaced in accordance with Section R606.9.
3.
Piers 	shall be constructed in accordance with Section R606.6 and Section R606.6.1, and shall be bonded into the load-bearing masonry wall in accordance with Section R608.1.1 or R608.1.1.2.

4.
The maximum height of a 4-inch (102 mm) load≠bearing masonry foundation wall supporting wood-frame walls and floors shall not be more than 4 feet (1219 mm).

5.
Anchorage shall be in accordance with Section R403.1.6, Figure R404.1.5(1), or as specified by engineered design accepted by the building offi≠cial.




6. The unbalanced fill for 4-inch (102 mm) founda≠tion walls shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm) for solid masonry or 12 inches (305 mm) for hol≠low masonry.
7. 	In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, pre≠scriptive reinforcement shall be provided in the horizontal and vertical direction. Provide mini≠mum horizontal joint reinforcement of two No. 9 gage wires spaced not less than 6 inches (152
1
mm) or one /4 inch (6.4 mm) diameter wire at 10 inches (254 mm) on center vertically. Provide minimum vertical reinforcement of one No. 4 bar at 48 inches (1220 mm) on center horizontally grouted in place.
0
R404.1.6 Height above fmished grade. Concrete and masonry foundation walls shall extend above the finished grade adjacent to the foundation at all points a minimllin
of 4 inches (102 mm) where masonry veneer is used and a minimum of 6 inches (152 mm) elsewhere. R404.1. 7 Backfill placement. Backfill shall not be placed against the wall until the wall has sufficient strength and has been anchored to the floor above, or has been suffi≠ciently braced to prevent damage by the backfill. Exception: Bracing is not required for walls supporting

less than 4 feet (1219 mm) of unbalanced backfill. R404.1.8 Rubble stone masonry. Rubble stone masonry foundation walls shall have a minimum thickness of 16 inches (406 mm), shall not support an unbalanced backfill exceeding 8 feet (2438 mm) in height, shall not support a soil pressure greater than 30 pounds per square foot per foot (4.71 kPalm), and shall not be constructed in Seismic



FOUNDATIONS
Design Categories D0, D1, D2 or townhouses in Seismic Design Category C, as established in Figure R301.2(2).
R404.1.9 Isolated masonry piers. Isolated masonry piers shall be constructed in accordance with this section and the general masonry construction requirements of Section R606. Hollow masonry piers shall have a minimum nomi≠nal thickness of 8 inches (203 mm), with a nominal height not exceeding four times the nominal thickness and a nom≠inal length not exceeding three times the nominal thick≠ness. Where hollow masonry units are solidly filled with concrete or grout, piers shall be permitted to have a nomi≠nal height not exceeding ten times the nominal thickness. Footings for isolated masonry piers shall be sized in accor≠dance with Section R403.1.1.
R404.1.9.1 Pier cap. Hollow masonry piers shall be capped with 4 inches (1 02 mm) of solid masonry or concrete, a masonry cap block, or shall have cavities of the top course filled with concrete or grout. Where required, termite protection for the pier cap shall be provided in accordance with Section R3 18.
R404.1.9.2 Masonry piers supporting floor girders.
Masonry piers supporting wood girders sized in accor≠dance with Tables R502.5(1) and R502.5(2) shall be permitted in accordance with this section. Piers sup≠porting girders for interior bearing walls shall have a minimum nominal dimension of 12 inches (305 mm) and a maximum height of 10 feet (3048 mm) from top of footing to bottom of sill plate or girder. Piers sup≠porting girders for exterior bearing walls shall have a minimum nominal dimension of 12 inches (305 mm) and a maximum height of 4 feet (1220 mm) from top of footing to bottom of sill plate or girder. Girders and sill plates shall be anchored to the pier or footing in accor≠dance with Section R403.1.6 or Figure R404.1.5(1). Floor girder bearing shall be in accordance with Sec≠tion R502.6.
R404.1.9.3 Masonry piers supporting braced wall panels. Masonry piers supporting braced wall panels shall be designed in accordance with accepted engi≠neering practice.
R404.1.9.4 Seismic design of masonry piers.
Masonry piers in all dwellings located in Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2, and townhouses in Seis≠mic Design Category C, shall be designed in accor≠dance with accepted engineering practice.
R404.1.9.5 Masonry piers in flood hazard areas.
Masonry piers for dwellings in flood hazard areas shall be designed in accordance with Section R322.
R404.2 Wood foundation walls. Wood foundation walls
shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Sec≠
tions R404.2.1 through R404.2.6 and with the details shown
in Figures R403.1(2) and R403.1(3).
R404.2.1 Identification. All load-bearing lumber shall be identified by the grade mark of a lumber grading or inspection agency which has been approved by an accredi≠tation body that complies with DOC PS 20. In lieu of a grade mark, a certificate of inspection issued by a lumber







FOUNDATIONS
grading or inspection agency meeting the requirements of this section shall be accepted. Wood structural panels shall conform to DOC PS 1 or DOC PS 2 and shall be identified by a grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved agency.
R404.2.2 Stud size. The studs used in foundation walls shall be 2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm by 152 mm) members. When spaced 16 inches (406 mm) on center, a wood spe≠cies with an Fb value of not less than 1,250 pounds per square inch (8619 kPa) as listed in AF&PAINDS shall be used. When spaced 12 inches (305 mm) on center, an Fb of not less than 875 psi (6033 kPa) shall be required.
R404.2.3 Height of backfill. For wood foundations that are not designed and installed in accordance with AF&PA PWF, the height of backfill against a foundation wall shall not exceed 4 feet (1219 mm). When the height of fill is more than 12 inches (305 mm) above the interior grade of a crawl space or floor of a basement, the thickness of the plywood sheathing shall meet the requirements of Table R404.2.3.
R404.2.4 Backf'Jlling. Wood foundation walls shall not be backfilled until the basement floor and first floor have been constructed or the walls have been braced. For crawl space construction, backfill or bracing shall be installed on the interior of the walls prior to placing backfill on the exterior.


R404.2.5 Drainage and dampprooting. Wood founda≠tion basements shall be drained and dampproofed in accor≠dance with Sections R405 and R406, respectively.
R404.2.6 Fastening. Wood structural panel foundation wall sheathing shall be attached to framing in accordance

with Table R602.3(1) and Section R402.1.1.
R404.3 Wood sill plates. Wood sill plates shall be a mini≠mum of 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) nominal lum≠ber. Sill plate anchorage shall be in accordance with Sections R403.1.6 and R602.11.
R404.4 Retaining walls. Retaining walls that are not later≠ally supported at the top and that retain in excess of 24 inches (610 mm) of unbalanced fill shall be designed to ensure sta≠bility against overturning, sliding, excessive foundation pres≠sure and water uplift. Retaining walls shall be designed for a safety factor of 1.5 against lateral sliding and overturning.




TABLE R404.2.3
PLYWOOD GRADE AND THICKNESS FOR WOOD FOUNDATION CONSTRUCTION (30 pcf equivalent-fluid weight soil pressure)

FACE GRAIN ACROSS STUDS  FACE GRAIN PARALLEL TO STUDS  
HEIGHT OF FILL  STUD SPACING  
(Inches)  (Inches)  Grade" Minimum thickness Span rating  Grade" Minimum thickness Span rating  
(Inches)  (inches)"'ï  

B
15/32 32/16
12
24
16
B
15/32 32/16
A  15/32  32/16  
B  15/32c  32116  
A  15/32c  32/16  
B  19/32c (4, 5 ply)  40/20  


A 15/32 32/16 12
15/32 32/16 B 15/32c (4, 5 ply) 32/16 36
B B 19/32 (4, 5 ply) 40/20 A 19/32 40/20
15/32c
B16 32/16
B 23/32 48/24

B
15/32 32/16
12
48
B
19/32 40/20
16
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per cubic foot = 0.1572 kN/m3ï
a. Plywood shall be of the following minimum grades in accordance with DOC PS 1 or DOC PS 2:
1. DOC PS 1 Plywood grades marked:
1.1. Structural I C-D (Exposure 1).
1.2.
C-D (Exposure 1).

2.
DOC PS 2 Plywood grades marked:



2.1. Structural I Sheathing (Exposure 1).
2.2. Sheathing (Exposure 1).

15/32c
A 	32/16
B 19/32c(4, 5 ply) 40/20 19/32c
A 40/20 A 23/32 48/24


3. Where a major portion of the wall is exposed above ground and a better appearance is desired, the following plywood grades marked exterior are suitable:
3.1. Structural I A-C, Structural I B-C or Structural I C-C (Plugged) in accordance with DOC PS 1.
-



3.2. A-C Group 1, B-C Group 1, C-C (Plugged) Group 1 or MDO Group 1 in accordance with DOC PS 1.
3.3. Single Floor in accordance with DOC PS 1 or DOC PS 2.
b.
Minimum thickness 	15/32 inch, except crawl space sheathing may be 3/8 inch for face grain across studs 16 inches on center and maximum 2-foot depth of unequal fill.

c.
For this fill height, thickness and grade combination, panels that are continuous over less than three spans (across less than three stud spacings) require blocking 16 inches above the bottom plate. Offset adjacent blocks and fasten through studs with two 16d corrosion-resistant nails at each end.


0


0

0


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE






R404.5 Precast concrete foundation walls.
R404.5.1 Design. Precast concrete foundation walls shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering prac≠tice. The design and manufacture of precast concrete foun≠dation wall panels shall comply with the materials requirements of Section R402.3 or ACI 318. The panel design drawings shall be prepared by a registered design professional.
R404.5.2 Precast concrete fonndation design drawings.
Precast concrete foundation wall design drawings shall be submitted to the building official and approved prior to installation. Drawings shall include, at a minimum, the information specified below:
1.
Design loading as applicable;

2.
Footing design and material;

3.
Concentrated loads and their points of application;

4.
Soil bearing capacity;

5.
Maximum allowable total uniform load;

6.
Seismic design category; and

7.
Basic wind speed.



R404.5.3 Identification. Precast concrete foundation wall panels shall be identified by a certificate of inspection label issued by an approved third party inspection agency.
FOUNDATIONS
SECTION R405
FOUNDATION DRAINAGE


R405.1 Concrete or masonry foundations. Drains shall be provided around all concrete or masonry foundations that retain earth and enclose habitable or usable spaces located below grade. Drainage tiles, gravel or crushed stone drains, perforated pipe or other approved systems or materials shall be installed at or below the area to be protected and shall dis≠charge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage system. Gravel or crushed stone drains shall extend at least 1 foot (305 mm) beyond the outside edge of the foot≠ing and 6 inches (152 mm) above the top of the footing and be covered with an approved filter membrane material, The top of open joints of drain tiles shall be protected with strips of building paper. Perforated drains shall be surrounded with an approved fllter membrane or the fllter membrane shall cover the washed gravel or crushed rock covering the drain. Drainage tiles or perforated pipe shall be placed on a mini≠mum of 2 inches (51 mm) of washed gravel or crushed rock at least one sieve size larger than the tile joint opening or per≠foration and covered with not less than 6 inches (152 mm) of the same material.
Exception: A drainage system is not required when the foundation is installed on well-drained ground or sand≠gravel mixture soils according to the Unified Soil Classi≠fication System, Group I Soils, as detailed in Table
R405.1.


TABLE R405.1
PROPERTIES OF SOILS CLASSIFIED ACCORDING TO THE UNIFIED SOIL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

SOIL GROUP  UNIFIED SOIL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM SYMBOL  DRAINAGE FROST HEAVE VOLUME CHANGE SOIL DESCRIPTION CHARACTERISTICS" POTENTIAL POTENTIAL EXPANSIONb  
GW  Well-graded gravels, gravel sand mixtures, little or no Good Low Lowfines  
GP  Poorly graded gravels or gravel sand mixtures, little or no Good Low Lowfines  
Group I  sw  Well-graded sands, gravelly sands, little or no fines Good Low Low  
SP  Poorly graded sands or gravelly sands, little or no fines Good Low Low  
GM  Silty gravels, gravel-sand-silt mixtures Good Medium Low  
SM  Silty sand, sand-silt mixtures Good Medium Low  
GC  Clayey gravels, gravel"sand-clay mixtures Medium Medium Low  
sc  Clayey sands, sand-clay mixture Medium Medium Low  
Group II  ML  Inorganic silts and very fine sands, rock flour, silty or Medium High Lowclayey fine sands or clayey silts with slight plasticity  
CL  Inorganic clays of low to medium plasticity, gravelly Medium Medium Medium clays, sandy clays, silty clays, lean clays to Low  
Group III Group IV  CH MH OL OH  Inorganic clays of high plasticity, fat clays Poor Medium High Inorganic silts, micaceous or diatomaceous fine sandy or Poor High Highsilty soils, elastic silts Organic silts and organic silty clays of low plasticity Poor Medium Medium Organic clays of medium to high plasticity, organic silts Unsatisfactory Medium High  
Pt  Peat and other highly organic soils Unsatisfactory Medium High  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a.
The percolation rate for good drainage is over 4 inches per hour, medium drainage is 2 inches to 4 inches per hour, and poor is less than 2 inches per hour.

b.
Soils with a low potential expansion typically have a plasticity index (PI) of 0 to 15, soils with a medium potential expansion have a PI of 10 to 35 and soils with a high potential expansion have a PI greater than 20.



FOUNDATIONS
R405.1.1 Precast concrete foundation. Precast concrete walls that retain earth and enclose habitable or useable space located below-grade that rest on crushed stone foot≠ings shall have a perforated drainage pipe installed below the base of the wall on either the interior or exterior side of the wall, at least one foot (305 mm) beyond the edge of the wall. If the exterior drainage pipe is used, an approved fil≠ter membrane material shall cover the pipe. The drainage system shall discharge into an approved sewer system or to daylight.
R405.2 Wood foundations. Wood foundations enclosing habitable or usable spaces located below grade shall be ade≠quately drained in accordance with Sections R405.2.1 through R405.2.3.
R405.2.1 Base. A porous layer of gravel, crushed stone or coarse sand shall be placed to a minimum thickness of 4 inches (102 mm) under the basement floor. Provision shall be made for automatic draining of this layer and the gravel or crushed stone wall footings.
R405.2.2 Vapor retarder. A 6-mil-thick (0.15 mm) poly≠ethylene vapor retarder shall be applied over the porous layer with the basement floor constructed over the poly≠ethylene.
R405.2.3 Drainage system. In other than Group I soils, a sump shall be provided to drain the porous layer and foot≠ings. The sump shall be at least 24 inches (610 mm) in diameter or 20 inches square (0.0129 m2), shall extend at least 24 inches (610 mm) below the bottom of the base≠ment floor and shall be capable of positive gravity or mechanical drainage to remove any accumulated water. The drainage system shall discharge into an approved sewer system or to daylight.
SECTION R406
FOUNDATION WATERPROOFING
AND DAMPPROOFING

R406.1 Concrete and masonry foundation dampproofing.
Except where required by Section R406.2 to be waterproofed, foundation walls that retain earth and enclose interior spaces and floors below grade shall be dampproofed from the top of the footing to the finished grade. Masonry walls shall have not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) portland cement parging applied to the exterior of the wall. The parging shall be damp≠proofed in accordance with one of the following:
1.
Bituminous coating.

2. 	
Three pounds per square yard (1.63 kg/m2) of acrylic modified cement.

3.
One-eighth 	inch (3.2 mm) coat of surface-bonding cement complying with ASTM C 887.

4.
Any material permitted for waterproofing in Section R406.2.

5.
Other approved methods or materials.


Exception: Parging of unit masonry walls is not required where a material is approved for direct appli≠cation to the masonry.





Concrete walls shall be dampproofed by applying any one of the above listed dampproofing materials or any one of the waterproofing materials listed in Section R406.2 to the exte≠rior of the wall.
R406.2 Concrete and masonry foundation waterproormg.
In areas where a high water table or other severe soil-water conditions are known to exist, exterior foundation walls that retain earth and enclose interior spaces and floors below grade shall be waterproofed from the top of the footing to the finished grade. Walls shall be waterproofed in accordance with one of the following:
1.
Two-ply hot-mopped felts.

2.
Fifty-five-pound (25 kg) roll roofmg.

3.
Six-mil (0.15 mm) polyvinyl chloride.

4.
Six-mil (0.15 mm) polyethylene.

5.
Forty-mil (1 mm) polymer-modified asphalt.

6.
Sixty-mil (1.5 mm) flexible polymer cement.

7.
One-eighth-inch 	(3 mm) cement-based, fiber-rein≠forced, waterproof coating.

8. 	
Sixty-mil (0.22 mm) solvent-free liquid-applied syn≠


thetic rubber. Exception: Organic-solvent-based products such as hydrocarbons, chlorinated hydrocarbons, ketones and esters shall not be used for ICF walls with expanded poly≠styrene form material. Use of plastic roofing cements, acrylic coatings, latex coatings, mortars and pargings to seal ICF walls is permitted. Cold-setting asphalt or hot asphalt shall conform to type C of ASTM D 449. Hot asphalt shall be applied at a temperature of less than 200∞F (93∞C).

AU joints in membrane waterproofing shall be lapped and sealed with an adhesive compatible with the membrane.
R406.3 Dampproofing for wood foundations. Wood foun≠dations enclosing habitable or usable spaces located below grade shall be dampproofed in accordance with Sections R406.3.1 through R406.3.4.
R406.3.1 Panel joint sealed. Plywood panel joints in the foundation walls shall be sealed full length with a caulking compound capable of producing a moisture-proof seal under the conditions of temperature and moisture content at which it will be applied and used.
R406.3.2 Below-grade moisture barrier. A 6-mil-thick
(0. 15 mm) polyethylene film shall be applied over the below-grade portion of exterior foundation walls prior to backfilling. Joints in the polyethylene f:tlm shall be lapped 6 inches (152 mm) and sealed with adhesive. The top edge of the polyethylene film shall be bonded to the sheathing to form a seal. Film areas at grade level shall be protected from mechanical damage and exposure by a pressure pre≠servatively treated lumber or plywood strip attached to the wall several inches above finish grade level and extending approximately 9 inches (229 mm) below grade. The joint between the strip and the wall shall be caulked full length prior to fastening the strip to the wall. Other coverings appropriate to the architectural treatment may also be







2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


used. The polyethylene film shall extend down to the bot≠tom of the wood footing plate but shall not overlap or extend into the gravel or crushed stone footing.
R406.3.3 Porous fill. The space between the excavation and the foundation wall shall be backfilled with the same material used for footings, up to a height of 1 foot (305 mm) above the footing for well-drained sites, or one-half the total back-fill height for poorly drained sites. The porous fill shall be covered with strips of 30-pound (13.6 kg) asphalt paper or 6-mil (0.15 mm) polyethylene to per≠mit water seepage while avoiding infiltration of fine soils.
R406.3.4 Backf"IIl. The remainder of the excavated area shall be backfilled with the same type of soil as was removed during the excavation.
R406.4 Precast concrete foundation system dampproof≠ing. Except where required by Section R406.2 to be water≠proofed, precast concrete foundation walls enclosing habitable or useable spaces located below grade shall be dampproofed in accordance with Section R406. 1.
R406.4.1 Panel joints sealed. Precast concrete foundation panel joints shall be sealed full height with a sealant meet≠ing ASTM C 920, Type S or M, Grade NS, Class 25, Use NT, MorA. Joint sealant shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
0 SECTION R407 COLUMNS
R407.1 Wood column protection. Wood columns shall be protected against decay as set forth in Section R317.
R407 .2 Steel column protection. All surfaces (inside and outside) of steel columns shall be given a shop coat of rust≠inhibitive paint, except for corrosion-resistant steel and steel treated with coatings to provide corrosion resistance.
R407 .3 Structural requirements. The columns shall be restrained to prevent lateral displacement at the bottom end. Wood columns shall not be less in nominal size than 4 inches by 4 inches (102 mm by 102 mm). Steel columns shall not be less than 3-inch-diameter (76 mm) Schedule 40 pipe manu≠factured in accordance with ASTM A 53 Grade B or approved equivalent.

Exception: In Seismic Design Categories A, B and C, col≠umns no more than 48 inches (1219 mm) in height on a pier or footing are exempt from the bottom end lateral dis≠placement requirement within under-floor areas enclosed by a continuous foundation.
SECTION R408 UNDER-FLOOR SPACE
R408.1 Ventilation. The under-floor space between the bot≠tom of the floor joists and the earth under any building (except space occupied by a basement) shall have ventilation openings through foundation walls or exterior walls. The minimum net area of ventilation openings shall not be less than 1 square foot (0.0929 m2) for each 150 square feet (14 m2) of under-floor space area, unless the ground surface is



FOUNDATIONS

covered by a Class 1 vapor retarder material. When a Class 1 vapor retarder material is used, the minimum net area of ven≠tilation openings shall not be less than 1 square foot (0.0929 m2) for each 1,500 square feet (140m2) of under-floor space area. One such ventilating opening shall be within 3 feet (914 mm) of each comer of the building.
R408.2 Openings for under-floor ventilation. The mini≠mum net area of ventilation openings shall not be less than 1 square foot (0.0929 m2) for each 150 square feet (14 m2) of under-floor area. One ventilation opening shall be within 3 feet (9 15 mm) of each comer of the building. Ventilation openings shall be covered for their height and width with any of the following materials provided that the least dimension of the covering shall not exceed 1/4 inch (6.4 mm):
1. Perforated sheet metal plates not less than 0.070 inch
(1.8 mm) thick.
2. Expanded sheet metal plates not less than 0.047 inch
(1.2 mm) thick.
3. 	
Cast-iron grill or grating.

4.
Extruded load-bearing brick vents.

5.
Hardware 	cloth of 0.035 inch (0.89 mm) wire or heavier. ,

6.
Corrosion-resistant wire mesh, with the least dimension


being 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) thick. Exception: The total area of ventilation openings shall be permitted to be reduced to 1/1,500 of the under-floor area where the ground surface is covered with an approved Class I vapor retarder material and the required openings are placed to provide cross ventilation of the space. The installation of operable louvers shall not be prohibited.

R408.3 Unvented crawl space. Ventilation openings in under-floor spaces specified in Sections R408 .1 and R408.2 shall not be required where:
1.
Exposed earth is covered with 	a continuous Class I vapor retarder. Joints of the vapor retarder shall overlap by 6 inches (152 mm) and shall be sealed or taped. The edges of the vapor retarder shall extend at least 6 inches (152 mm) up the stem wall and shall be attached and sealed to the stem wall or insulation; and

2. 	
One of the following is provided for the under-floor space:


2. 1. Continuously operated mechanical exhaust ven≠tilation at a rate equal to 1 cubic foot per minute
(0.47 Us) for each 50 square feet (4.7 ) of crawlspace floor area, including an air pathway to the common area (such as a duct or transfer grille). Crawl space perimeter walls shall be insulated in accordance with the minimum insu≠lation requirements established in the Califor≠nia Energy Code. Crawl space insulation shall be permanently fastened to the wall and extend downward from the floor to the finished grade level and then vertically and/or horizontally for at least an additional 24 inches (610 mm).
2.2. Conditioned air supply sized to deliver at a rate equal to 1 cubic foot per minute (0.47 L/s) for









FOUNDATIONS
each 50 square feet (4.7 m2) of under-floor area,
including a return air pathway to the common
area (such as a duct or transfer grille). Crawl
space perimeter walls shall be insulated in
accordance with the minimum insulation
requirements established in the California
Energy Code. Crawl space insulation shall be

permanently fastened to the wall and extend
downward from the floor to the finished grade
level and then vertically and/or horizontally for
at least an additional 24 inches (610 mm).




2.3. Plenum in structures complying with the 	Cali≠
fornia Mechanical Code, if under-floor space is
used as a plenum.

R408.4 Access. Access shall be provided to all under-floor spaces. Access openings through the floor shall be a mini≠mum of 18 inches by 24 inches (457 mm by 610 mm). Open≠ings through a perimeter wall shall be not less than 16 inches by 24 inches (407 mm by 610 mm). When any portion of the through-wall access is below grade, an areaway not less than 16 inches by 24 inches (407 mm by 610 mm) shall be pro≠vided. The bottom of the areaway shall be below the thresh≠old of the access opening. Through wall access openings shall not be located under a door to the residence. See the Califor≠nia Mechanical Code for access requirements where mechan≠ical equipment is located under floors.
R408.5 Removal of debris. The under-floor grade shall be cleaned of all vegetation and organic material. All wood forms used for placing concrete shall be removed before a building is occupied or used for any purpose. All construction materials shall be removed before a building is occupied or used for any purpose.


R408.6 Finished grade. The finished grade of under-floor surface may be located at the bottom of the footings; how≠ever, where there is evidence that the groundwater table can rise to within 6 inches (152 mm) of the finished floor at the building perimeter or where there is evidence that the surface water does not readily drain from the building site, the grade in the under-floor space shall be as high as the outside fin≠ished grade, unless an approved drainage system is provided.
R408. 7 Flood resistance. For buildings located in flood haz≠ard areas as established in Table R301.2(1):
1.
Walls enclosing the under-floor space shall be provided
with flood openings in accordance with Section
R322.2.2.


2.
The finished ground level of the under-floor space shall
be equal to or higher than the outside finished ground
level on at least one side.






Exception: Under-floor spaces that meet the require≠
ments of FEMAIFIA TB 11 -1.





2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE





