---
chapter: Chapter 5
title: FLOORS
---

CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE -MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE CHAPTER 5-FLOORS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.)
0
Adopting agency Adopt entire chapter Adopt entire chapter as amended (amended sections listed below)  BSC  SFM  HCD 1 2 1/AC X  DSA OSHPD BSCC DHS AGR DWR CEC CAAC ss 1 2 3 4  SL  SLC  
Adopt only those sections that are listed below  
[California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1]  
Chapter I Section  
R502.1  X  
R502.11.1  X  
R506. 2.3. 1  . . .  ..  


0


()

0
0

The Califorma Code of (CCR), Title 19, DIVISion 1 proviSions tirat are found m tire Califomm Fzre Code area reprmt from tire current CCR,
Title 19, Division 1 text for tire code user's convenience only. The scope, applicability and appeals procedures of CCR, Title 19, Division I remain tire same.

CHAPTER S
FLOORS




*
SECTION R501
GENERAL

R501.1 Application. The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the floors for all build≠ings including the floors of attic spaces used to house mechanical or plumbing fixtures and equipment.
R501.2 Requirements. Floor construction shall be capable of accommodating all loads according to Section R301 and of transmitting the resulting loads to the supporting structural elements.
R501.3 Fire protection of floors. Floor assemblies, not required elsewhere in this code to be fire-resistance rated, shall be provided with a 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard membrane, 5/8-inch (16 mm) wood structural panel membrane, or equivalent on the underside of the floor framing member.
Exceptions:
1.
Floor assemblies located directly over a space pro≠tected by
an automatic sprinkler system in accor≠dance with Section R313, NFPA13D, or other approved equivalent sprinkler system.

2.
Floor assemblies located directly over a crawl space not intended for storage or fuel-fired appliances.

3.
Portions 	of floor assemblies can be unprotected when complying with the following:


3.1. The aggregate area of the unprotected por≠tions shall not exceed 80 square feet per story
3.2. Fire 	blocking in accordance with Section R302. 11.1 shall be installed along the perim≠eter of the unprotected portion to separate the unprotected portion from the remainder of the floor assembly.
4. Wood floor assemblies using dimension lumber or structural composite lumber equal to or greater than 2-inch by 10-inch (50.8 mm by 254 mm) nominal dimension, or other approved floor assemblies dem≠onstrating equivalent fire performance.
SECTION R502
WOOD FLOOR FRAMING


R502.1 Identification. Load-bearing dimension lumber for joists, beams and girders shall be identified by a grade mark of a lumber grading or inspection agency that has been approved by an accreditation body that complies with DOC
PS 20. In lieu of a grade mark, a certificate of inspection issued by a lumber grading or inspection agency meeting the requirements of this section shall be accepted.
Note: See Section R301.1.1.1 for limited-density owner≠built rural dwellings.
R502.1.1 Preservative-treated lumber. Preservative treated dimension lumber shall also be identified as required by Section R317 .2.
R502.1.2 Blocking and subtlooring. Blocking shall be a minimum of utility grade lumber. Subflooring may be a minimum of utility grade lumber or No. 4 common grade boards.
R502.1.3 End-jointed lumber. Approved end-jointed lum≠ber identified by a grade mark conforming to Section RS02. 1 may be used interchangeably with solid-sawn mem≠bers of the same species and grade. End-jointed lumber







FLOORS
used in an assembly required elsewhere in this code to have a fire-resistance rating shall have the designation "Heat Resistant Adhesive" or "HRA" included in its grade mark.
R502.1.4 Prefabricated wood 1-joists. Structural capaci≠ties and design provisions for prefabricated wood !-joists shall be established and monitored in accordance with ASTM D5055.
R502.1.5 Structural glued laminated timbers. Glued laminated timbers shall be manufactured and identified as required in ANSI/AITC Al90.1 and ASTM D 3737.
R502.1.6 Structural log members. Stress grading of structural log members of nonrectangular shape, as typi≠cally used in log buildings, shall be in accordance with ASTM D 3957. Such structural log members shall be iden≠tified by the grade mark of an approved lumber grading or inspection agency. In lieu of a grade mark on the material, a certificate of inspection as to species and grade issued by a lumber-grading or inspection agency meeting the require≠ments of this section shall be permitted to be accepted.


R502.1.7 Structural composite lumber. Structural capacities for structural composite lumber shall be estab≠lished and monitored in accordance with ASTM D 5456.
R502.2 Design and construction. Floors shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, Figure R502.2 and Sections R317 and R318 or in accordance with AF&PAINDS.
R502.2.1 Framing at braced wall lines. A load path for lateral forces shall be provided between floor framing and braced wall panels located above or below a floor, as spec≠ified in Section R602.10.8.
ï
R502.3 Allowable joist spans. Spans for floor joists shall be in accordance with Tables R502.3.1(1) and R502.3.1(2). For other grades and species and for other loading conditions, refer to the AF&PA Span Tables for Joists and Rafters.
R502.3.1 Sleeping areas and attic joists. Table R502.3.1(1) shall be used to determine the maximum allow≠able span of floor joists that support sleeping areas and attics that are accessed by means of a fixed stairway in accordance with Section R3 11. 7 provided that the design live load does not exceed 30 pounds per square foot (1.44 kPa) and the design dead load does not exceed 20 pounds per square foot (0.96 kPa). The allowable span of ceiling joists that support attics used for limited storage or no stor≠age shall be determined in accordance with Section R802.4.
R502.3.2 Other floor joists. Table R502.3.1(2) shall be used to determine the maximum allowable span of floor joists that support all other areas of the building, other than sleeping rooms and attics, provided that the design live load does not exceed 40 pounds per square foot (1.92 kPa) and the design dead load does not exceed 20 pounds per square foot (0.96 kPa).
R502.3.3 Floor cantilevers. Floor cantilever spans shall not exceed the nominal depth of the wood floor joist. Floor cantilevers constructed in accordance with Table R502.3.3(1) shall be permitted when supporting a light≠frame bearing wall and roof only. Floor cantilevers sup≠porting an exterior balcony are permitted to be constructed in accordance with Table R502.3.3(2)
R502.4 Joists under bearing partitions. Joists under paral≠lel bearing partitions shall be of adequate size to support the load. Double joists, sized to adequately support the load, that are separated to permit the installation of piping or vents shall be full depth solid blocked with lumber not less than 2 inches (51 mm) in nominal thickness spaced not more than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center. Bearing partitions perpendicular to joists shall not be offset from supporting girders, walls or par≠titions more than the joist depth unless such joists are of suffi≠cient size to carry the additional load.
R502.5 Allowable girder spans. The allowable spans of
girders fabricated of dimension lumber shall not exceed the values set forth in Tables R502.5(1) and R502.5(2).
R502.6 Bearing. The ends of each joist, beam or girder shall have not less than 1.5 inches (38 mm) of bearing on wood or metal and not less than 3 inches (76 mm) on masonry or con≠crete except where supported on a l-inch by 4-inch (25.4 mm by 102 mm) ribbon strip and nailed to the adjacent stud or by the use of approved joist hangers. The bearing on masonry or concrete shall be direct, or a sill plate of 2-inch-minimum (51 mm) nominal thickness shall be provided under the joist, beam or girder. The sill plate shall provide a minimum nomi≠nal bearing area of 48 square inches (30 865 square mm).
R502.6.1 Floor systems. Joists framing from opposite sides over a bearing support shall lap a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm) and shall be nailed together with a minimum three lOd face nails. A wood or metal splice with strength equal to or greater than that provided by the nailed lap is permitted.
R502.6.2 Joist framing. Joists framing into the side of a wood girder shall be supported by approved framing anchors or on ledger strips not less than nominal 2 inches by 2 inches (51 mm by 51 mm).

R502.7 Lateral restraint at supports. Joists shall be sup≠ported laterally at the ends by full-depth solid blocking not less than 2 inches (51 mm) nominal in thickness; or by attachment to a full-depth header, band or rim joist, or to an adjoining stud or shall be otherwise provided with lateral support to prevent rotation.
Exceptions:
1.
Trusses, 	structural composite lumber, structural glued-laminated members and !-joists shall be sup≠ported laterally as required by the manufacturer's recommendations.

2.
In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, lateral restraint shall also be provided at each intermediate support.



R502.7.1 Bridging. Joists exceeding a nominal 2 inches by 12 inches (51 mm by 305 mm) shall be supported later≠ally by solid blocking, diagonal bridging (wood or metal), or a continuous 1 inch by 3 inch (25.4 mm by 76 mm) strip nailed across the bottom of joists perpendicular to joists at intervals not exceeding 8 feet (2438 mm).
Exception: Trusses, structural composite lumber, structural glued-laminated members and !-joists shall
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE






CJ

0

0




0 be supported laterally as required by the manufacturer' s recommendations.
0
R502.8 Cutting, drilling and notching. Structural floor members shall not be cut, bored or notched in excess of the limitations specified in this section. See Figure R502.8. R502.8.1 Sawn lumber. Notches in solid lumber joists, rafters and beams shall not exceed one-sixth of the depth of the member, shall not be longer than one-third of the
0
depth of the member and shall not be located in the middle one-third of the span. Notches at the ends of the member shall not exceed one-fourth the depth of the member. The tension side of members 4 inches (102 mm) or greater in nominal thickness shall not be notched except at the ends of the members. The diameter of holes bored or cut into
members shall not exceed one-third the depth of the mem≠ber. Holes shall not be closer than 2 inches (5 1 mm) to the top or bottom of the member, or to any other hole located in the member. Where the member is also notched, the hole shall not be closer than 2 inches (5 1 mm) to the notch.
R502.8.2 Engineered wood products. Cuts, notches and holes bored in trusses, structural composite lumber, struc≠tural glue-laminated members or !-joists are prohibited except where permitted by the manufacturer's recommen≠dations or where the effects of such alterations are specifi≠cally considered in the design of the member by a registered design professional.
0 R502.9 Fastening. Floor framing shall be nailed in accor≠dance with Table R602.3(1). Where posts and beam or girder
construction is used to support floor framing, positive con≠nections shall be provided to ensure against uplift and lateral displacement.
(J
R502.10 Framing of openings. Openings in floor framing shall be framed with a header and trimmer joists. When the header joist span does not exceed 4 feet (1219 mm), the header joist may be a single member the same size as the floor joist. Single trimmer joists may be used to carry a single header joist that is located within 3 feet (914 mm) of the trimmer joist bear≠ing. When the header joist span exceeds 4 feet (1219 mm), the trimmer joists and the header joist shall be doubled and of suf≠ficient cross section to support the floor joists framing into the header. Approved hangers shall be used for the header joist to trimmer joist connections when the header joist span exceeds 6 feet (1829 mm). Tail joists over 12 feet (3658 mm) long shall
be supported at the header by framing anchors or on ledger strips not less than 2 inches by 2 inches (51 mm by 51 mm). R502.11 Wood trusses.

R502.11.1 Design. Wood trusses shall be designed in accordance with approved engineering practice. The design and manufacture of metal plate connected wood trusses shall comply with ANSiffPI 1. The truss design
> 	drawings shall be prepared by a registered design profes≠sional.
R502.11.2 Bracing. Trusses shall be braced to prevent rotation and provide lateral stability in accordance with the requirements specified in the construction documents for the building and on the individual truss design drawings. In the absence of specific bracing requirements, trusses

FLOORS
shall be braced in accordance with accepted industry prac≠tices, such as, the SBCA Building Component Safety Information (BCSI) Guide to Good Practice for Handling, Installing & Bracing of Metal Plate Connected Wood Trusses.
R502.11.3 Alterations to trusses. Truss members and components shall not be cut, notched, spliced or otherwise altered in any way without the approval of a registered design professional. Alterations resulting in the addition of load (e.g., HV AC equipment, water heater, etc.), that exceed the design load for the truss, shall not be permitted without verification that the truss is capable of supporting the additional loading.

R502.11.4 Truss design drawings. Truss design draw≠ings, prepared in compliance with Section R502. 11 .1, shall be submitted to the building official and approved prior to installation. Truss design drawings shall be pro≠vided with the shipment of trusses delivered to the job site. Truss design drawings shall include, at a minimum, the information specified below:
1.
Slope or depth, span and spacing.

2.
Location of all joints.

3.
Required bearing widths.

4.
Design loads as applicable:


4. 1. Top chord live load;
4.2. Top chord dead load;
4.3. Bottom chord live load;
4.4. Bottom chord dead load;
4.5. Concentrated loads and their points of appli≠cation; and
4.6.
Controlling wind and earthquake loads.

5.
Adjustments to lumber and joint connector design values for conditions of use.

6.
Each reaction force and direction.

7. 	
Joint connector type and description, e.g., size, thickness or gauge, and the dimensioned location of each joint connector except where symmetrically located relative to the joint interface.

8.
Lumber size, species and grade for each member.

9.
Coiinection requirements for:


9. 1. Truss-to-girder-truss;
9.2. Truss ply-to-ply; and
9.3. Field splices.
10. 	
Calculated deflection ratio and/or maximum description for live and total load.

11.
Maximum 	axial compression forces in the truss members to enable the building designer to design the size, connections and anchorage of the perma≠nent continuous lateral bracing. Forces shall be shown on the truss drawing or on supplemental doc≠uments.

12.
Required permanent truss member bracing location.
















FLOORS
SUBFLOOR OR
FLOOR SHEATHING≠SEE SECTION R503
OPTIONAL FINISH
FLOOR

21N. CLEARANCE ≠SEE SECTION

R1001.11
HEADER-DOUBLE IF MORE 4FT SPAN
FIREPLACE
LAP JOIST 3 1N. MIN. ORSPLICE-BEE SECTIONR502.6.1
DOUBLE JOISTS UNDER BEARING
PARTITIONS. IF JOISTS ARE
SEPARATED FOR PIPES, BLOCK
4FT ON CENTER MAXIMUM
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
FIGURE R502.2 FLOOR CONSTRUCTION
JOISTS-SEE TABLES
R502.3.1(1)AND R502.3.1 (2)
SILL PLATE
BAND, RIM OR HEADER JOIST
BRIDGING BETWEEN
JOISTS-BEE SECTION
R502.7.1
PROVISION FOR PIPESAND VENTS


\
"------)



2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


FLOORS

0 TABLE R502.3.1(1)
FLOOR JOIST SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES
(Residential sleeping areas, live load = 30 psf, UA = 360)"


FLOORS

TABLE R502.3.1(1)-continued
FLOOR JOIST SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES
(Residential sleeping areas, live load = 30 psf, U = 360)"


()


a. Dead load limits for townhouses in Seismic Design Category C and all structures in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 shall be determined in accordance with Section R301.2.2.2. 1.


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

FLOORS
TABLE R502.3.1(2)
FLOOR JOIST SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES
(Residential living areas, live load = 40 psf, UA = 360)b




0
0





FLOORS
TABLE R502.3.1 (2)--continued
FLOOR JOIST SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES
(Residential living areas, live load = 40 psf, U = 360)b


b. Dead load limits for townhouses in Seismic Design Category C and all structures in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, and D2 shall be determined in accordance with Section R301 .2.2.2. 1.
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


FLOORS

TABLE R502.3.3(1)
CANTILEVER SPANS FOR FLOOR JOISTS SUPPORTING LIGHT-FRAME EXTERIOR BEARING WALL AND ROOF ONLYa,b,c, l,g,h
(Floor Live Load :;;; 40 psf, Roof Live Load :;;; 20 psf)

0

Member & Spacing  Maximum Cantilever Span (Uplift Force at Backspan Support In Lbs.)"∑ ï Ground Snow Load :;;; 20 psf 30 psf SO psf 70 psf Roof Width Roof Width Roof Width Roof Width  
24 ft  32 ft  40 ft  24 ft  32 ft  40 ft  24 ft  32 ft  40 ft  24 ft  32 ft  40 ft  
2 X 8@ 12"  20" (177)  15" (227)  - 18" (209)  - - - - - - - -
2 X 10 @ 16"  29" (228)  21" (297)  16" (364)  26" (271)  18" (354)  - 20" (375)  - - - - -
2 X 10 @ 12"  36" (166)  26" (219)  20" (270)  34" (198)  22" (263)  16" (324)  26" (277)  - - 19" (356)  - -
2 X 12 @ 16"  - 32" (287)  25" (356)  36" (263)  29" (345)  21" (428)  29" (367)  20" (484)  - 23" (47 1)  - -
2 X 12 @ 12"  - 42" (209)  31" (263)  - 37" (253)  27" (3 17)  36" (27 1)  27" (358)  17" (447)  31" (348)  19" (462)  -
2x 12 @ 8"  - 48" (136)  45" (169)  - 48" (164)  38" (206)  - 40" (233)  26" (294)  36" (230)  29" (304)  18" (379)  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 k:Pa.
a.
Tabulated values are for clear-span roof supported solely by exterior bearing walls.

b.
Spans are based on No. 2 Grade lumber of Douglas fir-larch, hem-fir, southern pine and spruce-pine-fir for repetitive (three or more) members.

c.
Ratio of backs pan to cantilever span shall be at least 3 : 1.

d.
Connections capable of resisting the indicated uplift force shall be provided at the backspan support.


0
e. Uplift force is for a backspan to cantilever span ratio of 3:1. Tabulated uplift values are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by a factor equal to 3 divided by the actual backspan ratio provided (3/backspan ratio).
f. 	
See Section R301.2.2.2.5, Item 1, for additional limitations on cantilevered floor joists for detached one-and two-family dwellings in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, or D2 and townhouses in Seismic Design Category C, D0, D1 or D2ï

g.
A full-depth rim joist shall be provided at the unsupported end of the cantilever joists. Solid blocking shall be provided at the supported end.

h.
Linear interpolation shall be permitted for building widths and ground snow loads other than shown.


TABLE R502.3.3(2)
CANTILEVER SPANS FOR FLOOR JOISTS SUPPORTING EXTERIOR BALCONYa,b,e, l

Member Size  Spacing  Maximum Cantilever Span (Uplift Force at Backspan Support In lb)c.ï Ground Snow LOad  
:;;; 30 psf  SO psf  70 psf  
2x8 2x8  12" 16"  42" (139) 36" (151)  39" (156) 34" (171)  34" (165) 29" (180)  
2x 10  12"  61" (164)  57" (189)  49" (201)  
2x 10  16"  53" (180)  49" (208)  42" (220)  
2x 10 2x 12 2x 12  24" 16" 24"  43" (212) 72" (228) 58" (279)  40'' (241) 67" (260) 54" (319)  34" (255) 57" (268) 47" (330)  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 k:Pa.
a.
Spans are based on No. 2 Grade lumber of Douglas fir-larch, hem-fir, southern pine and spruce-pine-fir for repetitive (three or more) members.

b.
Ratio of backspan to cantilever span shall be at least 2:1 .

c.
Connections capable of resisting the indicated uplift force shall be provided at the backspan support.

d.
Uplift force is for a backspan to cantilever span ratio of 2: I. Tabulated uplift values are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by a factor equal to 2 divided by the actual backspan ratio provided (2/backspan ratio).

e.
A full-depth rim joist shall be provided at the unsupported end of the cantilever joists. Solid blocking shall be provided at the supported end.

f. 	
Linear interpolation shall be permitted for ground snow loads other than shown.



FLOORS
R502.12 Draftstopping required. Draftstopping shall be provided in accordance with Section R302.12.
R502.13 Fireblocking required. Fireblocking shall be pro≠vided in accordance with Section R302.11.
SECTION R503
FLOOR SHEATHING

R503.1 Lumber sheathing. Maximum allowable spans for lumber used as floor sheathing shall conform to Tables R503.1, RS03.2.1.1(1) and RS03.2.1.1(2).
TABLE R503.1
MINIMUM THICKNESS OF LUMBER FLOOR SHEATHING


For SI: 1 mch =
25.4 mm, 1 pound per square mch = 6.8
95 kPa.
N/A = Not applicable.
a. 	
For this support spacing, lumber sheathing shall have a minimum Fb of 675 and minimum E of 1,100,000 (see AF&PAINDS).

b.
For this support spacing, lumber sheathing shall have a minimum Fb of 765 and minimum E of 1,
400,000 (see AF&PAINDS).

c.
For this support spacing, lumber sheathing shall have a minimum Fb of 855 and minimum E of 1,700,000 (see AF&PAINDS).


R503.1.1 End joints. End joints in lumber used as sub≠flooring shall occur over supports unless end-matched lumber is used, in which case each piece shall bear on at least two joists. Subflooring may be omitted when joist spacing does not exceed 16 inches (406 mm) and a l-inch
(25.4 mm) nominal tongue-and-groove wood strip floor≠ing is applied perpendicular to the joists.
R503.2 Wood structural panel sheathing.
R503.2.1 Identification and grade. Wood structural panel sheathing used for structural purposes shall conform to DOC PS 1, DOC PS 2 or, when manufactured in Can≠ada, CSA 0437 or CSA 0325. All panels shall be identi≠fied for grade, bond classification, and Performance Category by a grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved agency. The Performance Category value shall be used as the "nominal panel thickness" or "panel thickness" whenever referenced in this code.
R503.2.1.1 Subtloor and combined subtloor under≠layment. Where used as subflooring or combination subfloor underlayment, wood structural panels shall be of one of the grades specified in Table R503.2.1.1(1).
∑
When sanded plywood is used as combination subfloor
underlayment, the grade, bond classification, and Per≠formance Category shall be as specified in Table
RS03.2.1.1 (2).
R503.2.2 Allowable spans. The maximum allowable span for wood structural panels used as subfloor or combination subfloor underlayment shall be as set forth in Table R503.2.1.1(1), or APA E30. The maximum span for
TABLE ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR PLYWOOD COMBINATION SUBFLOOR UNDERLAYMENT"
IDENTIFICATION  SPACING OF JOISTS (inches) 20  24  
Species groupb  -- -
1  1/2 518  3/4  
2, 3  5/8 3/4  7/8  
4  3/4 7/8  1  

For SI: 1 mch = 25.4 mm, I pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.
a. Plywood continuous over two or more spans and face grain perpendicular to supports. Unsupported edges shall be tongue-and-groove or blocked except where nominal 1/4-inch-thick underlayment or 3/4-inch wood finish floor is used. Allowable uniform live load at maximum span based on deflection of 1/36D of span is 100 psf.

C)
b. Applicable to all grades of sanded exterior-type plywood.
sanded plywood combination subfloor underlayment shall
be as set forth in Table R503.2.1.1(2).

R503.2.3 Installation. Wood structural panels used as
subfloor or combination subfloor underlayment shall be
attached to wood framing in accordance with Table
R602.3(1) and shall be attached to cold-formed steel fram≠
ing in accordance with Table R505.3.1(2).

R503.3 Particleboard.
R503.3.1 Identification and grade. Particleboard shall
conform to ANSI A208.1 and shall be so identified by a
grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an
approved agency.



R503.3.2 Floor underlayment. Particleboard floor under≠
layment shall conform to Type PBU and shall not be less
than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) in thickness.

R503.3.3 Installation. Particleboard underlayment shall
be installed in accordance with the recommendations of
the manufacturer and attached to framing in accordance
with Table R602.3(1).

SECTION R504
PRESSURE PRESERVATIVELV
TREATED-WOOD FLOORS (ON GROUND)


R504.1 General. Pressure preservatively treated-wood base≠ment floors and floors on ground shall be designed to with≠stand axial forces and bending moments resulting from lateral soil pressures at the base of the exterior walls and floor live and dead loads. Floor framing shall be designed to meet joist deflection requirements in accordance with Section R301.


R504.1.1 Unbalanced soil loads. Unless special provision
is made to resist sliding caused by unbalanced lateral soil
loads, wood basement floors shall be limited to applica≠
tions where the differential depth of fill on opposite exte≠
rior foundation walls is 2 feet (610 mm) or less.



R504.1.2 Construction. Joists in wood basement floors
shall bear tightly against the narrow face of studs in the
foundation wall or directly against a band joist that bears
on the studs. Plywood subfloor shall be continuous over
lapped joists or over butt joints between in-line joists. Suf≠
ficient blocking shall be provided between joists to trans≠



2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

FLOORS

TABLE R502.5(1)
GIRDER SPANS" AND HEADER SPANS" FOR EXTERIOR BEARING WALLS
(Maximum spans for Douglas fir-larch, hem-fir, southern pine and spruce-pine-fir!' and required number of jack studs)

.
GROUND SNOW LOAD (psft
30 50 70
GIRDERS AND HEADERS SIZE Building wldthï(feet) SUPPORnNG
20 28 36 20 28 36 20 28 36
0 Span NJd Span NJd Span NJd Span NJd Span NJd Span NJd Span NJd Span NJd Span
0
2-2x4 3-6 1 3-2 1 2-10 1 3-2 1 2-9 1 2-6 1 2-10 1 2-6 1 2-3
2-2x6 5-5 1 4-8 1 4-2 1 4-8 1 4-1 1 3-8 2 4-2 1 3-8 2 3-3
2-2x8 6-10 1 5-11 2 5-4 2 5-11 2 5-2 2 4-7 2 5-4 2 4-7 2 4-1
2-2 X 10 8-5 2 7-3 2 6-6 2 7-3 2 6-3 2 5-7 2 6-6 2 5-7 2 5-0
2-2 X 12 9-9 2 8-5 2 7-6 2 8-5 2 7-3 2 6-6 2 7-6 2 6-6 2 5-10

Roof and ceiling 3-2x 8 8-4 1 7-5 1 6-8 1 7-5 1 6-5 2 5-9 2 .6-8 1 5-9 2 5-2
3-2 X 10 10-6 1 9-1 2 8-2 2 9-1 2 7-10 2 7-0 2 8-2 2 7-0 2 6-4
0
bearing floor
3-2 X 10 8-9 2 7-8 2 6-11 2 7-11 2 6-11 2 6-3 2 7-3 2 6-4 2 5-8 3-2 X 12 10-2 2 8-11 2 8-0 2 9-2 2 8-0 2 7-3 2 8-5 2 7-4 2 6-7 4-2x8 8-1 1 7-3 1 6-7 1 7-5 1 6-6 1 5-11 2 6-10 1 6-0 2 5-5
4-2 X 10 10-1 1 8-10 2 8-0 2 9-1 2 8-0 2 7-2 2 8-4 2 7:4 2 6-7
NJd
1 2 2 2 3 2 2

3-2 X 12 12-2 2 10-7 2
2
10-7 2 9-2 2 8-2 2 2 8-2
2 7-4

4-2x 8 9-2 1 8-4 1 7-8 1 8-4 1 7-5 1 6-8 1 7-8 1 6-8 1 5-11
4-2 X 10 11-8 1 10-6 1 2 10-6 1 9-1 2 8-2 2 9-5 2 8-2
2 7-3

4-2 X 12 2 2 10-11 2 9-514-1 1 12-2 2 10-11 2 12-2 2 10-7
2 8-5

2-2x4 3-1 1 2-9 1 2-5 1 2-9 1 2-5 1 2-2 1 2-7 1 2-3 1 2-0
2 3-32-2x6 4-6 1 4-0 1 3-7 2 4-1 1 3-7 2 3-3 2

2 2-11

2 5-0 2 4-6 2 5-2 2 4-6 2 4-1 22-2x 8 2 4-9 2 4-2
2-2 X 10 2 5-17-0 2 6-2 2 5-6 2 6-4 2 5-6 2 5-0 2
2 4-7

2-2 X 12 8-1 2 7-1 2 6-5 2 7-4 2 6-5 2 5-9 3 6-8 2 5-10 3
Roof, ceiling
and one center-3-2x 8 7-2 1 6-3 2 5-8 2 6-5 2 5-8 2 5-1 2 5-11 2 5-2 2
2 2 2 2

4-2 X 12 11-9 2 10-3 2 9-3 2 10-7 2 2 8-4 2 9-8 2 8-6
2 7-7

2-2x4 2-8 1 2-4 1 2-1 1 2-7 1 2-3 1 2-0 1 2-5 1 2-1 1 1-10 1
2-2x 6 3-11 1 3-5 2 3-0 2 3-10 2 3-4 2 3-0 2 3-6 2 3-1 2 2-9 2
2-2x 8 5-0 2 4-4 2 3-10 2 4-10 2 4-2 2 3-9 2 4-6 2 3-11 2 3-6 2
2-2 X 10 6-1 2 5-3 2 4-8 2 5-11 2 5-1 2 4-7 3 5-6 2 4-9 2 4-3 3
2-2 X 12 7-1 2 6-1 3 5-5 3 6-10 2 5-11 3 5-4 3 6-4 2 5-6 3 5-0 3
Roof, ceiling and one clear 3-2x 8 6-3 2 5-5 2 4-10 2 6-1 2 5-3 2 4-8 2 5-7 2 4-11 2 4-5 2
span floor
3-2 X 10
7-7 2 6-7 2 5-11 2 7-5 2 6-5 2 2 6-10 2 6-0 2
3-2 X 12 8-10 2 7-8 2 6-10 2 8-7 2 7-5 2 6-8 2 7-11 2 6-11 2 6-3
2

4-2x8 7-2 1 6-3 2 5-7 2 7-0 1 6-1 2 5-5 2 6-6 1 5-8 2 5-1
2

4-2 X 10
\_
(")'
8-9 2 7-7 2 6-10 2 8-7 2 7-5 2 6-7 2 7-11 2 6-11 2 6-2
4-2 X 12 10-2 2 8-10 2 7-11 2 9-11 2 8-7 2 7-8 2 9-2 2 8-0 2 7-2
2-2x4 2-7 1 2-3 1 2-0 1 2-6 1 2-2 1 1-11 1 2-4 1 2-0 1 1-9
2 3-3
2 2-11 2 3-8 2 3-2 2 2-10 2 3-5 2 3-0 2 2-8
2-2x6 2 4-2 2 3-9 2 4-7 2 4-0 2 3-8 2 4-4 2 3-9 22-2x 8
2-2 X 10 5-9 2 5-1 2 4-7 3 5-8 2 4-11 2 4-5 3 5-3 2 4-7 3 4-2
3

2-2 X 12 6-8 2 5-10 3 5-3 3 6-6 2 5-9 3 5-2 3 6-1 3 5-4 3 4-10
3

Roof, ceiling
and two center-
3-2x 8 5-11 2 5-2 2 4-8 2 2 5-1 2 4-7 2 5-5 2 4-9 2 4-3
bearing floors
3-2 X 10 7-3 2 6-4 2 5-8 2 7-1 2 6-2 2 5-7 2 6-7 2
2 5-3
3

3-2 X 12 8-5 2 7-4 2 6-7 2 8-2 2 7-2 2 6-5 3 7-8 2 6-9 2 6-1
2

4-2x 8 6-10 1 6-0 2 5-5 2 6-8 1 5-10 2 5-3 2 6-3 2 5-6 2 4-11
2

4-2 X 10 8-4 2 7-4 2 6-7 2 8-2 2 7-2 2 6-5 2 7-7 2 6-8 2 6-0
4-2 X 12 9-8 2 8-6 2 7-8
2 2 8-3 2 7-5 2 8-10 2 7-9 2 7-0
Roof, ceiling,  2-2 x4  2 1  1  1-8  1  1-6  2  2-0  1  1-8  1  1-5  2  2-0  1  1-8  1  1-5  2  
and two clear  2-2 x6  3-1  2  2-8  2  2-4  2  3-0  2  2-7  2  2-3  2  2-11  2  2-7  2  2-3  2  
span floors  2-2 x 8  3-10  2  3-4  2  3-0  3  3-10  2  3-4  2  2-11  3  3-9  2  3-3  2  2-11  3  
(continued)  
201 3 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE  169  

FLOORS
TABLE R502.5(1 )-continued
GIRDER SPANS" AND HEADER SPANS" FOR EXTERIOR BEARING WALLS
(Maximum spans for Douglas fir-larch, hem-fir, southern pine and spruce-pine-fir" and required number of jack studs)

GROUND SNOW LOAD (psf)"
30 50 70
GIRDERS AND
HEADERS

Building widthï (feet)
SUPPORTING

SIZE 28 36 36 2020 20 28 28 36
Span Span Span Span Span Span Span Span Span
2-2 X 10 4-9 2
4-1 3
3-8
2
4-0 3
3-7 3 4-7 3

3
4-8
4-0 3
3-6
3

5-6
4-9 3
2-2 X 12 3
4-3
3
5-5
3
4-8 3
4-2 3 5-4 3
4-7 3
4-1
4

3-2x 8
4-2 22
3-9
2
4-9
2
3-8 2 4-8 2
4-1 2
4-1 2
3-8
2

Roof, ceiling,
5-1 2
3-2 X 10
5-11
2
4-7
3
5-10
2
5-0 2
4-6 3
2
4-11 2
4-5
3

and two clear
6-9
2
5-11 3
3-2 X 12
6-10
5-4
3
2
5-10
3 3 6-8 2 5-9 3
5-2
3

span floors
5-7
4-10 2
4-2x 8 2
4-4
2
5-6
2
4-9 2
4-3 2 5-5 2
4-8 2
4-2
2

6-9
5-11 2
2
5-10 2
5-2 2 6-7 2
5-9 2

4-2 X 10 6-10 2
5-3
2
5-1
2

4-2 X 12
7-1 1
2
6-10 2
6-2
3
6-9

2
2 6-0 3
2
6-8
2
5-1 1
3


For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.
a. Spans are given in feet and inches.
b. Tabulated values assume #2 grade lumber.
c. Building width is measured perpendicular to the ridge. For widths between those shown, spans are permitted to be interpolated.
d. NJ -Number of jack studs required to support each end. Where the number of required jack studs equals one, the header is permitted to be supported by an approved framing anchor attached to the full-height wall stud and to the header.
e. Use 30 psf ground snow load for cases in which ground snow load is less than 30 psf and the roof live load is equal to or less than 20 psf.

TABLE R502.5(2)
GIRDER SPANS" AND HEADER SPANS" FOR INTERIOR BEARING WALLS
(Maximum spans for Douglas fir-larch, hem-fir, southern pine and spruce-pine-fir" and required number of jack studs)

0

0



HEADERS AND GIRDERS SUPPORTING  SIZE  BUILDING Width0(feet)  
20 28 36  
Span NJd Span NJd Span NJd  
One floor only  2-2 x4  3-1 1 2-8 1 2-5 1  
2-2 x6  4-6 1 3-11 1 3-6 1  
2-2 x 8  5-9 1 5-0 2 4-5 2  
2-2 X 10  7-0 2 6-1 2 5-5 2  
2-2 X 12  8-1 2 7-0 2 6-3 2  
3-2x8  7-2 1 6-3 I 5-7 2  
3-2 X 10  8-9 1 7-7 2 6-9 2  
3-2 X 12  10-2 2 8-10 2 7-10 2  
4-2x8 4-2 X 10  9-0 1 7-8 1 6-9 1 10-1 I 8-9 1 7-10 2  
4-2 X 12  11-9 1 10-2 2 9-1 2  
Two floors  2-2 x4  2-2 1 1-10 1 1-7 1  
2-2 x6  3-2 2 2-9 2 2-5 2  
2-2 x 8  4-1 2 3-6 2 3-2 2  
2-2 X 10  4-11 2 4-3 2 3-10 3  
2-2 X 12  5-9 2 5-0 3 4-5 3  
3-2x8  5-1 2 4-5 2 3-11 2  
3-2 X 10  6-2 2 5-4 2 4-10 2  
3-2 X 12 4-2x8  7-2 2 6-3 2 5-7 3 6-1 1 5-3 2 4-8 2  
4-2 X 10  7-2 2 6-2 2 5-6 2  
4-2 X 12  8-4 2 7-2 2 6-5 2  

For Sl: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a. Spans are given in feet and inches.
b. Tabnlated values assume #2 grade lumber.
c. Building width is measured perpendicular to the ridge. For widths between those shown, spans are permitted to be interpolated.
d. NJ -Number of jack studs required to support each end. Where the number of required jack studs equals one, the header is permitted to be supported by an approved framing anchor attached to the full-height wall stud and to the header.


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

FLOORS

0



0 For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
FIGURE R502.8 CUTTING, NOTCHING AND DRILLING




/
\
∑.
'
TABLE R503.2.1.1(1)
ALLOWABLE SPANS AND LOADS FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANELS FOR ROOF AND
SUB FLOOR SHEATHING AND COMBINATION SUBFLOOR UNDERLA YMENT"∑ b, c


Sheathingï 	Roof' Subfloorl
16/0  3/8  30  - 16  16  40  30  0  
20/0  3/8  50  - 20  20  40  30  0  
24/0  3/8  100  30  24  2  40  30  0  
24/16  7/16  100  40  24  24  50  40  16  
32/16  15,32ï 1/2  180  70  32  28  40  30  16h  
40120  19/32ï \  305  130  40  32  40  30  2Q"> i  
48/24  13/32ï 3/4  - 175  48  36  45  35  24  
60/32  \  - 305  60  48  45  35  32  

Combination subfloor

Underlayment, C-C plugged, single floor" 	Roof'
underlayment"

16 o.c.  19/32ï%  100  40  24  24  50  40  16i  
20 o.c.  19/32ï 5/8  150  60  32  32  40  30  2Qi.i  
24 o.c.  23/32ï \  240  100  48  36  35  25  24  
32 o.c.  7/8  - 185  48  40  50  40  32  
48 o.c.  13/32ï 11/s  - 290  60  48  50  40  48  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 =∑ 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.
a.
The allowable total loads were detennined using a dead load of 10 psf. If the dead load exceeds 10 psf, then the live load shall be reduced accordingly.

b.
Panels continuous over two or more spans with long dimension (strength axis) perpendicular to supports. Spans shall be limited to values shown because of possible effect of concentrated loads.

c.
Applies to panels 24 inches or wider.

d.
Lumber blocking, panel edge clips (one midway between each support, except two equally spaced between supports when span is 48 inches), tongue-and≠groove panel edges, or other approved type of edge support.

e.
Includes Structural I panels in these grades.

f.
Uniform load deflection limitation: 1/180 of span under live load plus dead load, 1/240 of span under live load only.

g.
Maximum span 24 inches for '%2-and 1/2-inch panels.

h.
Maximum span 24 inches where 3/4-inch wood finish flooring is installed at right angles to joists.

i.
Maximum span 24 inches where 1.5 inches of lightweight concrete or approved cellular concrete is placed over the subfloor.

j.
Unsupported edges shall have tongue-and-groove joints or shall be supported with blocking uilless minimum nominal 1/4-inch thick underlayment with end and edge joints offset at least 2 inches or 1.5 inches of lightweight concrete or approved cellular concrete is placed over the subfloor, or 3/4-inch wood finish flooring is installed at right angles to the supports. Allowable uniform live load at maximum span, based on deflection of 1/60 of span, is 100 psf.



3

k.
Unsupported edges shall have tongue-and-groove joints or shall be supported by blocking unless nominal 1/4-inch-thick underlayment with end and edge joints offset at least 2 inches or 3/4-inch wood finish flooring is installed at right angles to the supports. Allowable uniform live load at maximum span, based on deflection of 1/360 of span, is 100 psf, except panels with a span rating of 48 on center are limited to 65 psf total uniform load at maximum span.

I. 	
Allowable live load values at spans of 16" o.c. and 24" o.c taken from reference standard APA E30, APA Engineered Wood Construction Guide. Refer to reference standard for allowable spans not listed in the table.


C)

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



0 fer lateral forces at the base of the end walls into the floor system.
0
RS04.1.3 Uplift and buckling. Where required, resistance to uplift or restraint against buckling shall be provided by interior bearing walls or properly designed stub walls anchored in the supporting soil below.
RS04.2 Site preparation. The area within the foundation
0
walls shall have all vegetation, topsoil and foreign material removed, and any fill material that is added shall be free of vegetation and foreign material. The fill shall be compacted to assure uniform support of the pressure preservatively treated-wood floor sleepers.
R504.2.1 Base. A minimum 4-inch-thick (102 mm) granu≠
lar base of gravel having a maximum size of\ inch (19.1 mm) or crushed stone having a maximum size of 1/2 inch
(12.7 mm) shall be placed over the compacted earth.
R504.2.2 Moisture barrier. Polyethylene sheeting of minimum 6-mil (0.15 mm) thickness shall be placed over the granular base. Joints shall be lapped 6 inches (152 mm) and left unsealed. The polyethylene membrane shall be placed over the pressure preservatively treated-wood sleepers and shall not extend beneath the footing plates of the exterior walls.
R504.3 Materials. All framing materials, including sleepers, joists, blocking and plywood subflooring, shall be pressure≠preservative treated and dried after treatment in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A, Use Category 4B and Section 5.2), and shall bear the label of an accredited

agency.
SECTION R505 STEEL FLOOR FRAMING
RSOS.l Cold-formed steel floor framing. Elements shall be straight and free of any defects that would significantly affect structural performance. Cold-formed steel floor framing members shall comply with the requirements of this section.
0
RSOS.l.l Applicability limits. The provisions of this sec≠tion shall control the construction of cold-formed steel floor framing for buildings not greater than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in length perpendicular to the joist span, not greater than 40 feet (12 192 mm) in width parallel to the joist
span, and less than or equal to three stories above grade plane. Cold-formed steel floor framing constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be lim≠ited to sites subjected to a maximum design wind speed of 110 miles per hour (49 m/s), Exposure B or C, and a max≠imum ground snow load of 70 pounds per square foot

(3.35 kPa).
R505.1.2 In-line framing. When supported by cold≠formed steel framed walls in accordance with Section R603, cold-formed steel floor framing shall be constructed with floor joists located in-line with load-bearing studs located below the joists in accordance with Figure R505.1.2 and the tolerances specified as follows:
1. The maximum tolerance shall be 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) between the centerline of the horizontal framing


FLOORS
member and the centerline of the vertical framing member.
2. Where 	the centerline of the horizontal framing member and bearing stiffener are located to one side of the centerline of the vertical framing member, the maximum tolerance shall be 1/8 inch (3 mm) between the web of the horizontal framing member and the edge of the vertical framing member.
R505.1.3 Floor trusses. Cold-formed steel trusses shall be designed, braced and installed in accordance with AISI S 100, Section D4. In the absence of specific bracing requirements, trusses shall be braced in accordance with accepted industry practices, such as the SBCA Cold≠Formed Steel Building Component Safety Information ( CFSBCSI), Guide to Good Practice for Handling, Install≠ing & Bracing of Cold-Formed Steel Trusses. Truss mem≠bers shall not be notched, cut or altered in any manner without an approved design.

R505.2 Structural framing. Load-bearing cold-formed steel floor framing members shall comply with Figure R505.2(1) and with the dimensional and minimum thickness require≠ments specified in Tables R505.2(1) and R505.2(2). Tracks shall comply with Figure R505.2(2) and shall have a mini≠mum flange width of 11/4 inches (32 mm).
TABLE R505.2(2)
MINIMUM THICKNESS OF COLD-FORMED STEEL MEMBERS


DESIGNATION THICKNESS (mils)  MINIMUM BASE STEEL THICKNESS (inches)  
33  0.0329  
43  0.0428  
54  0.0538  
68  0.0677  
97  0.0966  



For SI: inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mil = 0.0254 mm.
R505.2.1 Material. Load-bearing cold-formed steel fram≠ing members shall be cold formed to shape from structural quality sheet steel complying with the requirements of one of the following:
1.
ASTM A 653: Grades 33 and 50 (Class 1 and 3).

2.
ASTM A 792: Grades 33 and 50A.

3.
ASTM A 1003: Structural Grades 33 Type H and 50 Type H.


R505.2.2 Identification. Load-bearing cold-formed steel framing members shall have a legible label, stencil, stamp or embossment with the following information as a mini≠mum:
1.
Manufacturer's identification.

2.
Minimum base steel thickness in inches (mm).

3.
Minimum coating designation.

4.
Minimum yield strength, in kips per square inch (ksi) (MPa).



R505.2.3 Corrosion protection. Load-bearing cold≠formed steel framing shall have a metallic coating comply≠ing with ASTM A 1003 and one of the following:

FLOORS




ft HORIZONTAL FRAMING
MEMBER
%" (19 mm)
MAX.

VERTICAL
t
FRAMING
MEMBER
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
ft HORIZONTAL FRAMING
MEMBER
%" (19 mm) MAX.
VERTICAL
t
FRAMING
MEMBER
FIGURE R505.1.2 IN-LINE FRAMING
TABLE R505.2(1)
COLD-FORMED STEEL JOIST SIZES


STIFFENER HORIZONTAL t FRAMING
(19 mm)
FRAMING
MEMBER
MEMBER


0
0

()






For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mil = 0.0254 mm. The member designation is defined by the first number representing the member depth in 0.01 inch, the letter "S" representing a stud or joist member, the second number representing the flange width in 0.01 inch, and the letter "t" shall be a number representing the minimum base metal thickness in mils [See Table R505.2(2)].

C_)



2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



0

()


0

WEB
0

FIGURE R505.2(2) TRACK SECTION

1. A minimum of G 60 in accordance with ASTM A
653.
2. A minimum of AZ 50 in accordance with ASTM A
792.

R505.2.4 Fastening requirements. Screws for steel-to≠steel connections shall be installed with a minimum edge distance and center-to-center spacing of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm), shall be self-drilling tapping, and shall conform to ASTM C 1513. Floor sheathing shall be attached to cold≠formed steel joists with minimum No. 8 self-drilling tap-

FLOORS
ping screws that conform to ASTM C 1513. Screws attaching floor-sheathing to cold-formed steel joists shall have a minimum head diameter of 0.292 inch (7 .4 mm) with countersunk heads and shall be installed with a mini≠mum edge distance of 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). Gypsum board ceilings shall be attached to cold-formed steel joists with minimum No. 6 screws conforming to ASTM C 954 or ASTM C 1513 with a bugle head style and shall be installed in accordance with Section R702. For all connec≠tions, screws shall extend through the steel a minimum of three exposed threads. All fasteners shall have rust inhibi≠tive coating suitable for the installation in which they are being used, or be manufactured from material not suscep≠tible to corrosion.
Where No. 8 screws are specified in a steel-to-steel connection, the required number of screws in the connec≠tion is permitted to be reduced in accordance with the reduction factors in Table R505.2.4 when larger screws are used or when one of the sheets of steel being con≠nected is thicker than 33 mils (0.84 mm). When applying the reduction factor, the resulting number of screws shall be rounded up.
TABLE R505.2.4 SCREW SUBSTITUTION FACTOR

SCREW SIZE  THINNEST CONNECTED STEEL SHEET (mils) 33 43  
#8  1.0 0.67  
.#10  0.93 0.62  
#12  0.86 0.56  

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm.
R505.2.5 Web holes, web hole reinforcing and web hole
patching. Web holes, web hole reinforcing, and web hole
patching shall be in accordance with this section.
R505.2.5.1 Web holes. Web holes in floor joists shall comply with all of the following conditions:

1.
Holes shall conform to Figure R505.2.5.1;

2.
Holes shall be permitted only along the centerline of the web of the framing member;


3.
Holes shall have a center-to-center spacing of not less than 24 inches (610 mm);

4.
Holes shall have a web hole width not greater than 0.5 times the member depth, or 21/2 inches


(64.5 mm);

5.
Holes shall have a web hole length not exceeding 41/2 inches (114 mm); and

6.
Holes shall have a minimum distance between the edge of the bearing surface and the edge of the web hole of not less than 10 inches (254 mm).




Framing members with web holes not conforming to the above requirements shall be reinforced in accor≠dance with Section R505.2.5.2, patched in accordance with Section R505.2.5.3 or designed in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
R505.2.5.2 Web hole reinforcing. Reinforcement of web holes in floor joists not conforming to the require≠



FLOORS
ments of Section R505.2.5.1 shall be permitted if the hole is located fully within the center 40 percent of the span and the depth and length of the hole does not exceed 65 percent of the flat width of the web. The reinforcing shall be a steel plate or C-shape section with a hole that does not exceed the web hole size limi≠tations of Section R505.2.5.1 for the member being reinforced. The steel reinforcing shall be the same thickness as the receiving member and shall extend at least 1 inch (25.4 mm) beyond all edges of the hole. The steel reinforcing shall be fastened to the web of the receiving member with No. 8 screws spaced no more than 1 inch (25.4 mm) center-to-center along the edges of the patch with minimum edge distance of 1/2 inch
(12.7 mm).
R505.2.5.3 Hole patching. Patching of web holes in floor joists not conforming to the requirements in Sec≠tion R505.2.5.1 shall be permitted in accordance with either of the following methods:
1. Framing members shall be replaced or designed in accordance with accepted engineering prac≠tices where web holes exceed the following size limits:
1.1. The depth of the hole, measured across the web, exceeds 70 percent of the flat width of the web; or

1.2.
The length of the hole measured along the web, exceeds 10 inches (254 mm) or the depth of the web, whichever is greater.

2.
Web 	holes not exceeding the dimensional requirements in Section R505.2.5.3, Item 1, shall be patched with a solid steel plate, stud section, or track section in accordance with Figure R505.2.5.3. The steel patch shall, as a minimum, be of the same thickness as the receiving member and shall extend at least 1 inch (25 mm) beyond all edges of the hole. The steel patch shall be fas≠tened to the web of the receiving member with No. 8 screws spaced no more than 1 inch (25



C.L.





mm) center-to-center along the edges of the patch with minimum edge distance of 1/2 inch (13 mm).
0

R505.3 Floor construction. Cold-formed steel floors shall be constructed in accordance with this section.
R505.3.1 Floor to foundation or load-bearing wall con≠
nections. Cold-formed steel framed floors shall be
anchored to foundations, wood sills or load-bearing walls
in accordance with Table R505.3.1(1) and Figure
R505.3.1(1), R505.3.1(2), R505.3.1(3), R505.3.1(4),
R505.3.1(5) or R505.3.1(6). Anchor bolts shall be located
not more than 12 inches (305 mm) from comers or the ter≠
mination of bottom tracks. Continuous cold-formed steel
joists supported by interior load-bearing walls shall be
constructed in accordance with Figure R505.3.1(7).


CJ

Lapped cold-formed steel joists shall be constructed in
accordance with Figure R505.3.1(8). End floor joists con≠
structed on foundation walls parallel to the joist span shall
be doubled unless a C-shaped bearing stiffener, sized in


0
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 nnn.
FIGURE R505.2.5.3 WEB HOLE PATCH
C.L.




2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


FLOORS
0
0
(J

0

CJ




TABLE FLOOR TO FOUNDATION OR BEARING WALL REQUIREMENTS"∑ b
FRAMING CONDITION  BASIC WIND SPEED  (mph) AND EXPOSURE  
85 mph Exposure C or less than 110 mph Exposure B  Less than 110 mph Exposure C  
Floor joist to wall track of exterior wall per Figure R505.3.1(1)  2-No. 8 screws  3-No. 8 screws  
Rim track or end joist to load-bearing wall top track per Figure R505.3.1(1)  1-No. 8 screw at 24 inches o.c.  J-No. 8 screw at 24 inches o.c.  
Rim track or end joist to wood sill per Figure R505.3. 1(2)  Steel plate spaced at 4 feet o.c. with 4-No. 8 screws and 4-1 Od or 6-8d common nails  Steel plate spaced at 2 feet o.c. with 4-No. 8 screws and 4-1 Od or 6-8d common nails  
Rim track or end joist to foundation per Figure R505.3.1(3)  1/2 inch minimum diameter anchor bolt and clip angle spaced at 6 feet o.c. with 8-No. 8 screws  1/2 inch minimum diameter anchor bolt and clip angle spaced at 4 feet o.c. with 8-No. 8 screws  
Cantilevered joist to foundation per Figure R505.3. 1(4)  1/2 inch minimum diameter anchor bolt and clip angle spaced at 6 feet o.c. with 8-No. 8 screws  1/2 inch minimum diameter anchor bolt and clip angle spaced at 4 feet o.c. with 8-No. 8 screws  
Cantilevered joist to wood sill per Figure R505.3.1(5)  Steel plate spaced at 4 feet o.c. with 4-No. 8 screws and 4-1 Od or 6-8d common nails  Steel plate spaced at 2 feet o.c. with 4-No. 8 screws and 4-1 Od or 6-8d common nails  
Cantilevered joist to exterior load-bearing wall track per Figure R505.3.1 (6)  2-No. 8 screws  3-No. 8 screws  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
a.
Anchor bolts are to be located not more than 12 inches from comers or the termination of bottom tracks (e.g., at door openings or comers). Bolts extend a minimum of 15 inches into masonry or 7 inches into concrete. Anchor bolts connecting cold-formed steel framing to the foundation stmcture are to be installed so that the distance from the center of the bolt hole to the edge of the connected member is not less than one and one-half bolt diameters.

b.
All screw sizes shown are minimum.


RIM TRACK
(MIN. 33 MIL THICK)

WEB STIFFENER
NO. S SCREWS THROUGH
JOIST FLANGE, CUP ANGLE
OR BENT STIFFENER SHEATHING


FASTEN RIM TRACK TO
WALL TRACK WITH NO. 8
SCREWS AT 24 1N. O.C.

NO. 8 SCREW THROUGHEACH FLANGE
LOAD-SEARING STUD

For SI: l mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
FIGURE 505.3.1(1)
FLOOR TO EXTERIOR LOAD-BEARING WALL STUD CONNECTION

TABLE R505.3.1 (2) FLOOR FASTENING SCHEDULE"

a. All screw sizes shown are minimum.
WEB STIFFENER
3 IN. X 3 IN. X 33 MIL
STEEL PLATE (MIN.)
ANCHOR BOLT OR OTHER CONNECTION AS REQUIRED
WOOD SILL AS REQUIRED FOUNDATION SILL SEALER AS REQUIRED
For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
FIGURE R505.3.1(2) FLOOR TO WOOD SILL CONNECTION


RIM TRACK MIN. 33 MIL THICK
4-NO. 8 SCREWS
MIN. 4-10d OR 6-8d COMMON NAILS



2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

FLOORS



For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
0
FIGURE R505.3.1(3)
FLOOR TO FOUNDATION CONNECTION






For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm.
FIGURE R505.3.1(4)
CANTILEVERED FLOOR TO FOUNDATION CONNECTION



FLOORS


For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
FIGURE R505.3.1(5) CANTILEVERED FLOOR TO WOOD SILL CONNECTION








For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm.
FIGURE R505.3.1 (6)
CANTILEVERED FLOOR TO EXTERIOR LOAD-BEARING WALL CONNECTION

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

FLOORS
0

CONNECTION OF BLOCKING
TO JOIST THROUGH FLANGE
OF WEB STIFFENER , CLIP ANGLE
OR BENT WEB OF BLOCKING

0
WITH 2 NO. 8 SCREWS (MIN. DEPTH OF ANGLE= JOIST DEPTH-2 IN.) (SEE FIGURE R505.3.1(4) FOR BLOCKING
0 BLOCKING EVERY OTHER JOIST
MIN. 33 MIL TRACK OR C..SHAPE
MIN. DEPTH = JOIST DEPTH -2 1N.
0
SHEATHING

NO. S SCREWS THROUGH
FLANGE. CLIP ANGLE OR
BENT

TOP TRACK
()
LOAD-BEARING STUD NO. 8 SCREW THROUGH EACH FLANGE
For SI: 1 mil= 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
0 FIGURE R505.3.1 (7)
CONTINUOUS SPAN JOIST SUPPORTED ON INTERIOR LOAD-BEARING WALL



0
0

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
FIGURE R505.3.1 (8) LAPPED JOISTS SUPPORTED ON INTERIOR LOAD-BEARING WALL
0



CJ

FIGURE R505.3.1(9) BEARING STIFFENERS FOR END JOISTS

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


FLOORS
0 accordance with Section R505.3.4, is installed web-to-web RSOS.3.3.1 Joist top flange bracing. The top flanges with the floor joist beneath each supported wall stud, as of cold-formed steel joists shall be laterally braced by shown in Figure R505.3.1(9). Fastening of cold-formed the application of floor sheathing fastened to the joists steel joists to other framing members shall be in accor≠in accordance with Section R505.2.4 and Table dance with Section R505.2.4 and Table R505.3.1(2). R505.3.1(2).
0
RSOS.3.2 Minimum floor joist sizes. Floor joist size and RSOS.3.3.2 Joist bottom flange bracing/blocking. thickness shall be determined in accordance with the limits Floor joists with spans that exceed 12 feet (3658 mm) set forth in Table R505.3.2(1) for single spans, and Tables shall have the bottom flanges laterally braced in accor≠
R505.3.2(2) and R505.3.2(3) for multiple spans. When dance with one of the following: continuous joist members are used, the interior bearing


1. Gypsum board installed with minimum No. 6 supports shall be located within 2 feet (610 mm) of mid≠screws in accordance with Section R702.
0
span of the cold-formed steel joists, and the individual 2. Continuous steel straps installed in accordance spans shall not exceed the spans in Table RS05.3.2(2) or

with Figure R505.3.3.2(1). Steel straps shall be R505.3.2(3), as applicable. Floor joists shall have a bear≠
spaced at a maximum of 12 feet (3658 mm) on
ing support length of not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) for center and shall be at least 11/2 inches (38 mm) in exterior wall supports and 31/2 inches (89 mm) for interior width and 33 mils (0.84 mm) in thickness. Straps wall supports. Tracks shall be a minimum of 33 mils (0.84
shall be fastened to the bottom flange of each mm) thick except when used as part of a floor header or joist with one No. 8 screw, fastened to blocking trimmer in accordance with Section R505.3.8. Bearing with two No. 8 screws, and fastened at each end stiffeners shall be installed in accordance with Section (of strap) with two No. 8 screws. Blocking iii R505.3.4.
accordance with Figure R505.3.3.2(1) or Figure
RSOS.3.3 Joist bracing and blocking. Joist bracing and
R505.3.3.2(2) shall be installed between joists at blocking shall be in accordance with this section.
each end of the continuous strapping and at a maximum spacing of 12 feet (3658 mm) mea≠
0 TABLE R505.3.2(1 )
ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR COLD-FORMED STEEL JOIST8-SINGLE SPANSa,b.c,d 33 ksi STEEL








JOIST DESIGNATION  30 PSF LIVE LOAD Spacing (inches)  40 PSF LIVE LOAD Spacing (inches)  
12  16 19.2  24  12  16 19.2  24  
5508 162-33  11'-7"  10'-7" 9'-6"  8'-6"  10'-7"  9'-3" 8'-6"  7'-6"  
5508 162-43  12'-8"  11'-6" 10'-10"  10'-2"  11'-6"  10'-5" 9'-10"  9'-1"  
5508 162-54  13'-7"  12'-4" 11'-7"  10'-9"  12'-4"  11'-2" 10'-6 "  9'-9"  
5508 162-68  14'-7"  1 3'-3" 12'-6 "  11 '-7"  1 3'-3"  12'-0 " 11'-4"  10'-6"  
5508 162-97  16'-2"  14'-9" 13'-10"  12'-10''  14'-9"  1 3'-4" 12'-7"  11 '-8 "  
8008 162-33  15'-8 "  1 3'-11 " 12'-9"  11'-5"  14'-3"  12'-5" 11 '-3"  9'-0 "  
8008 162-43  17'-1"  15'-6" 14'-7"  1 3'-7"  15'-6"  14'-1" 1 3'-3"  12'-4"  
8008 162-54  18'-4"  16'-8 " 1 5'-8"  14'-7"  16'-8 "  1 5'-2" 14'-3"  13'-3"  
8008 162-68  19'-9"  17'-11" 16'-10"  1 5'-8"  17'-11"  16'-3" 15'-4"  14'-2"  
8008 162-97  22'-0"  20'-0 " 16'-10''  17'-5"  20'-0''  18'-2" 17'-1"  1 5'-10"  
10008 162-43  20'-6 "  18'-8 " 17'-6"  15'-8"  18'-8 "  16'-11" 15'-6"  1 3'-11"  
10008 162-54  22'-1"  20'-0'' 18'-10"  17'-6"  20'-0 "  18'-2" 17'-2"  1 5'-11"  
10008 162-68  23'-9"  21'-7" 20'-3"  18'-10 "  21'-7"  1 9'-7" 18'-5"  17'-1"  
10008 162-97  26'-6 "  24'-1" 22'-8"  21'-0''  24'-1"  21 '-10" 20'-7"  1 9'-1"  
12008 162-43  23'-9"  20'-10 " 1 9'-0"  16'-8"  21'-5"  18'-6 " 16'-6"  1 3'-2"  
12008 162-54  25'-9"  23'-4" 22'-0"  20'-1"  23'-4"  21'-3" 20'-0''  1 7'-10"  
12008 162-68  27'-8"  25'-1" 23'-8"  21'-11 "  25'-1"  22'-10" 21 '-6"  21'-1"  
12008 162-97  30'-11"  28'-1" 26'-5"  24'-6"  28'-1"  25'-6" 24'-0''  22'-3"  
For 81: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 nun, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.


a.
Deflection criteria: I/480 for live loads, I/240 for total loads.

b.
Floor dead load = 10 psf.

c.
Table provides the maximum clear span in feet and inches.

d.
Bearing stiffeners are to be installed at all support points and concentrated loads.


201 3 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE FLOORS
TABLE R505.3.2(2)
30 PSF LIVE LOAD
40 PSF LIVE LOAD

JOIST
Spacing (Inches)
DESIGNATION Spacing (Inches)


12
16 19.2 24 12

19.2 24
8'-6" 7'-6"

5508 162-43  14'-5"  12'-5"  11'-4"  10'-2"  12'-9"  11'-11"  10'-1"  9'-0"  
5508 162-54  1 6'-3"  14'-1"  12'-10"  11'-6"  14'-5"  12'-6 "  11'-5"  10'-2"  
16'-9"  15'-6"  17'-9''  16'-2"  15'-2"  14'-1"




19'-9" 17'-11" 16'-10"

10'-4" 8'-8" 12'-4" 9'-11" 8'-7" 7'-2"
8008 162-54 8008 162-68 8008 162-97 10008 162-43 10008 162-54 23'-7" 26'-5" 29'-6" 22'-2" 26'-2"
20'-5" 23'-1" 26'-10" 18'-3" 22'-8"
18'-8" 21'-0" 25'-3" 16'-0" 20'-8" 16'-8" 18'-10" 22'-8" 13'-7" 18'-6"
21'-0" 23'-8" 26'-10" 18'-11" 23'-3"
18'-2" 20'-6" 24'-4" 15'-5" 20'-2"
16'-7"  14'-10''  
18'-8 "  16'-9"  
22'-6 "  20'-2"  
13'-6"  11'-5"  
18'-5"  16'-5"  



15'-9" 14'-1" 17'-9" 15'-4" 14'-0" 12' -0"
10008162-68 31'-5" 27'-2" 24'-10" 22'-2" 27'-11" 22'-1" 19'-9"

29'-11" 26'-9" 32'-3" 29'-2" 26'-7" 23'-9" 12008162-43 21'-8" 17'-6" 15'-3" 12'-10" 18'-3" 14'-8" 12'-8" 10'-6"

12008162-97 41'-5" 30'-10" 30'-7" 27'-5"
For 81: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.
a.
Deflection criteria: U480 for live loads, U240 for total loads.

b.
Floor dead load = 10 psf.


0

c.
Table provides the maximum clear span in feet and inches to either side of the interior support.
d.
Interior bearing supports for multiple span joists consist of structural (bearing) walls or beams.

e.




Bearing stiffeners are to be installed at all support points and concentrated loads.
f.
Interior supports shall be located within 2 feet of mid-span provided that each of the resulting spans does not exceed the appropriate maximum span shown in
the table above.










2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

:'-----)



FLOORS  
JOIST DESIGNATION  TABLE R505.3.2(3) ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR COLD-FORMED STEEL JOISTs-MULTIPLE SPANSa, b, c, d, e,l 50 ksi STEEL 30 PSF LIVE LOAD 40 PSF LIVE LOAD Spacing (inches) Spacing (Inches) 12 16 19.2 24 12 16 19.2  24  

0
550S162-33 13'-11" 12'-0" 11'-0"
12'-3" 10'-8" 8'-4"

550S162-43 16'-3" 14'-1" 12'-10" 11'-6" 14'-6" 12'-6" 11'-5" 10'-3" 550S162-54 18'-2" 16'-6" 15'-4" 13'-8" 16'-6" 14'-11" 13'-7" 12'-2" 550S162-68 19'-6" 17'-9" 16'-8" 15'-6" 17'-9" 16'-1" 15'-2" 14'-0"
550S162-97 21'-9" 18'-6" 17'-2" 19'-8" 17'-10" 16'-8" 15'-8"
800S162-33 15'-6" 12'-6" 10'-10" 13'-0" 10'-5" 8'-11" 6'-9"
0

800S162-43 22'-0" 19'-1" 17'-5" 15'-0'' 19'-7" 16'-11" 14'-10'' 12'-8" 800S162-54 24'-6" 22'-4" 20'-6" 17'-11" 22'-5" 19'-9" 17'-11" 15'-10'' 800S162-68 26'-6" 24'-1" 22'-8" 21'-0" 24'-1" 21'-10" 20'-7" 19'-2"
800S162-97 29'-9" 26'-8" 25'-2" 23'-5" 26'-8" 22'-11" 21' -4"
1000S 162-43  23'-6"  19'-2"  16'-9"  14'-2"  19'-11"  16'-2"  14'-0"  11'-9"  
1000S 162-54  28'-2"  23'-10"  21'-7"  18'-11 "  24'-8"  20'-11"  18'-9"  18'-4"  
1000S162-68  3 1'-10"  28'-11 "  27'-2"  25'-3"  28'-11"  26'-3"  24'-9"  22'-9"  

1000S 162-97 32'-1" 30'-3" 28'-1" 32'-1" 29'-2" 27'-6" 25'-6"
1200S162-43 22'-11" 18'-5" 16'-0" 13'-4" 19'-2" 15'-4" 13'-2" 10'-6" 1200S162-54 32'-8" 28'-1" 24'-9" 21'-2" 29'-0'' 23'-10'' 20'-11" 17'-9"
1200S 162-68 32'-5" 29'-4" 25'-10" 33'-4" 28'-6" 25'-9" 22'-7"

1200S162-97 41'-2" 32'-9" 32'-1" 29'-9"
0
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 k:Pa.
a.
Deflection criteria: U480 for live loads, U240 for total loads.

b.
Floor dead load = 10 psf.

c.
Table provides the maximum clear span in feet and inches to either side of the interior support.



d. Interior bearing supports for multiple span joists consist of structural (bearing) walls or beams.
e.
Bearing stiffeners are to be installed at all support points and concentrated loads.

f. 	
Interior supports shall be located within 2 feet of mid-span provided that each of the resulting spans does not exceed the appropriate maximum span shown in the table above.


0
0








CONTINUOUS 1'/, IN. X 33 MIL STEEL STRAP
For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254, 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254, 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
MIN. 33 MIL SOLID BLOCKING
AT EACH END AND AT 12 IN. O.C.

(
DEPTH OF BLOCKING = JOIST DEPTH MINUS 2 IN.

0
MIN. 2 IN. X 2 IN. X 33 MIL CLIP ANGLE FASTENED WITH 2 NO. (8 SCREWSTHROUGH EACH LEG DEPTH OF ANGLE
)
=JOIST DEPTH MINUS 2 IN.


2 NO. 8 SCREWS THROUGH
STRAP TO BLOCKING

NO. 8 SCREW THROUGH
()

STRAP TO JOIST TYP.
FIGURE R505.3.3.2(1) JOIST BLOCKING (SOLID)
0

NO. 8 SCREW THROUGH
MIN. 1'/2 1N. X 33 MIL FLAT STRAP



FIGURE R505.3.3.2(2)
JOIST BLOCKING (STRAP)

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


0

sured along the continuous strapping (perpendic≠u1ar to the joist run). Blocking shall also be located at the termination of all straps. As an alternative to blocking at the ends, anchoring the strap to a stable building component with two No. 8 screws shall be permitted.
R505.3.3.3 Blocking at interior bearing supports.
Blocking is not required for continuous back-to-hack
0
floor joists at bearing supports. Blocking shall be installed between every other joist for single continu≠ous floor joists across bearing supports in accordance with Figure R505.3.1(7). Blocking shall consist of C≠shape or track section with a minimum thickness of 33 mils (0.84 mm). Blocking shall be fastened to each
adjacent joist through a 33-mil (0.84 mm) clip angle, bent web of blocking or flanges of web stiffeners with two No. 8 screws on each side. The minimum depth of the blocking shall be equal to the depth of the joist minus 2 inches (51 mm). The minimum length of the angle shall be equal to the depth of the joist minus 2 inches (51 mm).
R505.3.3.4 Blocking at cantilevers. Blocking shall be installed between every other joist over cantilever bear≠ing supports in accordance with Figure R505.3.1(4), R505.3.1(5) or R505.3.1(6). Blocking shall consist of C-shape or track section with minimum thickness of 33 mils (0.84 mm). Blocking shall be fastened to each adjacent joist through bent web of blocking, 33 mil clip
() angle or flange of web stiffener with two No. 8 screws at each end. The depth of the blocking shall be equal to the depth of the joist. The minimum length of the angle shall be equal to the depth of the joist minus 2 inches (51 mm). Blocking shall be fastened through the floor sheathing and to the support with three No. 8 screws (top and bottom). R505.3.4 Bearing stiffeners. Bearing stiffeners shall be installed at each joist bearing location in accordance with this section, except for joists lapped over an interior sup≠port not carrying a load-bearing wall above. Floor joists supporting jamb studs with mu1tiple members shall have two bearing stiffeners in accordance with Figure R505.3.4(1). Bearing stiffeners shall be fabricated from a C-shaped, track or clip angle member in accordance with
() the one of following:
1. C-shaped bearing stiffeners:
1.1. Where the joist is not carrying a load-bearing wall above, the bearing stiffener shall be a minimum 33 mil (0.84 mm) thickness.

1.2. Where the joist is carrying a load-bearing wall above, the bearing stiffener shall be at least the same designation thickness as the wall stud above.
2. Track bearing stiffeners:

2.1. Where the joist is not carrying a load-bearing wall above, the bearing stiffener shall be a minimum 43 mil (1.09 mm) thickness.

FLOORS
2.2.
Where the joist is carrying 	a load-bearing wall above, the bearing stiffener shall be at least one designation thickness greater than the wall stud above.

3.
Clip angle bearing stiffeners: Where the clip angle bearing stiffener is fastened to both the web of the
member it is stiffening and an adjacent rim track using the fastener pattern shown in Figure R505.3.4(2), the bearing stiffener shall be a mini≠mum 2 inch by 2 inch (51 mm by 51 mm) angle sized in accordance with Tables R505.3.4(1), R505.3.4(2), R505.3.4(3), and R505.3.4(4).


The minimum length of a bearing stiffener shall be the depth of member being stiffened minus 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). Each bearing stiffener shall be fastened to the web of the member it is stiffening as shown in Figure R505.3.4(2). Each clip angle bearing stiffener shall also be fastened to

FIGURE R505.3.4(1) BEARING STIFFENERS UNDER JAMB STUDS

the web of the adjacent rim track using the fastener pattern shown in Figure R505.3.4(2). No. 8 screws shall be used for C-shaped and track members of any thickness and for clip angle members with a designation thickness less than or equal to 54. No. 10 screws shall be used for clip angle members with a designation thickness greater than 54.
R505.3.5 Cutting and notching. Flanges and lips of load≠bearing cold-formed steel floor framing members shall not be cut or notched.
R505.3.6 Floor cantilevers. Floor cantilevers for the top floor of a two-or three-story building or the first floor of a one-story building shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm). Cantilevers, not exceeding 24 inches (610 mm) and sup≠porting two stories and roof (i.e., frrst floor of a two-story building), shall also be permitted provided that all cantile≠vered joists are doubled (nested or back-to-hack). The doubled cantilevered joists shall extend a minimum of 6 feet (1829 mm) toward the inside and shall be fastened with a minimum of two No. 8 screws spaced at 24 inches

C..SECTIONITRACK
/ .,--≠
........

"
/
I \


ï
IN. LENGTH = \\
MINusHOFWEB
ït. IN.

I  (J

\
\ 8SCREWS I
\.
' /
-. __ ...,.,
.......

/
'
/
BEARING ∑sTIFFENER

I \
I ï ï t \


MIN. LENGTH =
f DEPTH OF WEB

MINUS ., IN.
\ I


\ (4)-NO. 8 SCREWS I
\. EQUALLY SPACED /
' /
......... __ .......


For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
FIGURE R505.3.4(2) BEARING STIFFENER

TABLE R505.3.4(1)
CLIP ANGLE BEARING STIFFENERS
(20 psf equivalent snow load)

MINIMUM THICKNESS (mils) OF 2 INCH x2 INCH CLIP ANGLE
Bottom floor In 2 story
Top floor Bottom floor In 3 story
Middle floor in 3 story
JOIST DESIGNATION
Joist spacing (Inches) Joist spacing (inches) Joist spacing (inches) 12
19.2
16 24 12 16 19.2 24 12 16 19.2
24

8008 162-33

-

43 43
43 43 54 68 68 68
8008 162-43
43
43
43
43 54 54 68 68
97
-

8008 162-54
43
43
43
9768 68 68
-

8008 162-68
43
43
97

43
43
54 68 5443

8008 162-97
43
43
43 43 43 5443 43

-

10008 162-43
43
43
43 54 68 97 97
-
-

10008 162-54
43
43
43
43 54 68
9768

10008 162-68
-

43 43
43 54 68 97 97 97
-

10008 162-97
43
97

43
43
43 43 43 43 54 43 68
12008 162-43
43
54
54
-
97 97
-

54
12008 162-54
54
54
54
9797 97

-

12008 162-68
43
54
54
43
979768

-

12008 162-97
43
43
43
9743 43 68

For SI: .1 mil= 0.254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


FLOORS


For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.
TABLE R505.3.4(3)
CLIP ANGLE BEARING STIFFENERS
(50 psf equivalent snow load)


JOIST DESIGNATION  MINIMUM THICKNESS (mils) OF 2 INCH x 2 INCH CLIP ANGLE  
Top floor Bottom floor in 2 story Middle floor In 3 story Bottom floor in 3 story  
Joist spacing (inches) Joist spacing (inches) Joist spacing (Inches)  
12  16 19.2 24 12 16 19.2 24 12 16 19.2  24  
8008 162-33  54  54 54 54 68 97 97 97 97 -- -
8008162-43  68  68 68 68 97 97 97 97 --- -
8008 162-54  54  68 68 68 97 97 97 97 --- -
8008162-68  43  43 54 54 68 97 97 97 97 -- -
8008162-97  43  43 43 43 43 43 43 54 54 68 97  -
10008 162-43  97  68 68 68 97 97 97 97 --- -
10008 162-54  97  97 68 68 97 97 97 ---- -
10008 162-68  68  97 97 97 97 ------ -
10008 162-97  43  43 43 43 54 68 97 97 --- -
12008 162-43  97  97 97 97 ------- -
12008 162-54  - 97 97 97 ------- -
12008 162-68  97  97 97 97 ------- -
12008 162-97  54  68 68 97 97 ------ -

For SI: 1 mil= 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.
FLOORS

TABLE R505.3.4(4)
CLIP ANGLE BEARING STIFFENERS
(70 psf equivalent snow load)

MINIMUM THICKNESS (mils) OF 2 INCH x 2 INCH CLIP ANGLE Bottom floor in 2 story
Top floor Bottom floor In 3 story
Middle floor in 3 story Joist spacing (inches) Joist spacing (inches) Joist spacing (inches) 12
JOIST DESIGNATION
I

19.2 24 12 16 19.2 24 12 16 19.2
16
24

97 97 97
-

68 68
68
68
800S 162-33
800S 162-43
97 97
-

97
800S 162-54
-

68
68 97
800S 162-68
68
-
97
-
-

43 43 43 54 68
43
800S 162-97
97 97
1000S 162-43
-

1000S 162-54
--

97
1000S 162-68
-
-

68
68 68 97
1000S 162-97
68
1200S 162-43  97  97  97  97  - - - - - - - -
1200S 162-54  - - - - - - - - - - - -
1200S 162-68  - - - - - - - - - - -

1200S 162-97
-

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.
C-SHAPE
INSIDE TRACK

4 NO. 8 SCREWS
THROUGH WEB OR
FLANGES AT EACH
SIDE OF SPLICE

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
FIGURE R505.3.7 TRACK SPLICE
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



0
0

0

0



(610 mm) on center through the webs (for back-to-back) or flanges (for nested joists).
R505.3.7 Splicing. Joists and other structural members shall not be spliced. Splicing of tracks shall conform to Figure R505.3.7.
R505.3.8 Framing of floor openings. Openings in floors shall be framed with header and trimmer joists. Header joist spans shall not exceed 6 feet (1829 mm) or 8 feet (2438 mm) in length in accordance with Figure RS05.3.8(1) or R505.3.8(2), respectively. Header and trimmer joists shall be fabricated from joist and track members, having a minimum size and thickness at least equivalent to the adjacent floor joists and shall be installed in accordance with Figures R505.3.8(1), RS05.3.8(2), R505.3.8(3), and R505.3.8(4). Each header joist shall be connected to trimmer joists with four 2 inch by 2 inch (51 mm by 51 mm) clip angles. Each clip angle shall be fas≠tened to both the header and trimmer joists with four No. 8 screws, evenly spaced, through each leg of the clip angle. The clip angles shall have a thickness not less than that of the floor joist. Each track section for a built-up header or trimmer joist shall extend the full length of the joist (continuous).
SECTION R506
CONCRETE FLOORS (ON GROUND)

R506.1 General. Concrete slab-on-ground floors shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section or ACI 332. Floors shall be a minimum 3.5 inches (89 mm) thick (for expansive soils, see Section R403.1.8). The specified compressive strength of concrete shall be as set forth in Section R402.2.


For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
FLOORS
R506.2 Site preparation. The area within the foundation
walls shall have all vegetation, top soil and foreign material
removed.
R506.2.1 Fill. Fill material shall be free of vegetation and foreign material. The fill shall be compacted to assure uni≠form support of the slab, and except where approved, the fill depths shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm) for clean sand or gravel and 8 inches (203 mm) for earth.
R506.2.2 Base. A 4-inch-thick (102 mm) base course con≠sisting of clean graded sand, gravel, crushed stone or crushed blast-furnace slag passing a 2-inch (51 mm) sieve shall be placed on the prepared subgrade when the slab is below grade.
Exception: A base course is not required when the con≠crete slab is installed on well-drained or sand-gravel mixture soils classified as Group I according to the United Soil Classification System in accordance with Table R405.1.
R506.2.3 Vapor retarder. A 6-mil (0.006 inch; 152 J.IDl) polyethylene or approved vapor retarder with joints lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm) shall be placed between the concrete floor slab and the base course or the prepared subgrade where no base course exists.
Exception: The vapor retarder may be omitted:

1.
From garages, utility buildings and other unheated accessory structures.

2.
For unheated storage rooms having an area of less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and carports.

3.
From driveways, walks, patios and other flatwork not likely to be enclosed and heated at a later date.







FIGURE R505.3.8(1)
COLD-FORMED STEEL FLOOR CONSTRUCTION: 6-FOOT FLOOR OPENING≠




For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
FIGURE R505.3.8(2)
COLD-FORMED STEEL FLOOR CONSTRUCTION-8-FOOT FLOOR OPENING



WITH 4 NO. 8 SCREWS
THROUGH EACH LEG, BOTH
SIDES OF CONNECTION




For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
FIGURE R505.3.8(3)
COLD-FORMED STEEL FLOOR CONSTRUCTION: FLOOR HEADER TO TRIMMER CONNECTION-6-FOOT OPENING

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE




FLOORS

4. Where approved by the building official, based on local site conditions.
R506.2.3.1 Capillary break. When a vapor retarder is required, a capillary break shall be installed in accor≠dance with the California Green Building Standards Code, Chapter 4, Division 4.5.
R506.2.4 Reinforcement support. Where provided in slabs on ground, reinforcement shall be supported to remain in place from the center to upper one third of the slab for the duration of the concrete placement.
SECTION R507
DECKS

R507.1 Decks. Where supported by attachment to an exterior wall, decks shall be positively anchored to the primary struc≠ture and designed for both vertical and lateral loads. Such attachment shall not be accomplished by the use of toenails or nails subject to withdrawal. Where positive connection to the primary building structure cannot be verified during inspec≠tion, decks shall be self-supporting. For decks with cantile≠vered framing members, connections to exterior walls or other framing members, shall be designed and constructed to resist uplift resulting from the full live load specified in Table R301.5 acting on the cantilevered portion of the deck.



()
NO. 8 SCREWS AT 24 IN. O.C. TOP AND BOTTOM (TYP.)
MINIMUM 2 IN. x 2 IN. CLIP ANGLE
WITH 4 NO. 8 SCREWS
THROUGH EACH LEG, BOTH
SIDES OF CONNECTION

/ / ---......
I
I I I
\\\ '.._
.... ....
\
\ \ I
R507 .2 Deck ledger connection to band joist. For decks supporting a total design load of SO pounds per square foot (2394 Pa) [40 pounds per square foot (1915 Pa) live load plus 10 pounds per square foot (479 Pa) dead load], the connection between a deck ledger of pressure-preservative-treated Southern Pine, incised pressure-preservative-treated Hem-Fir or approved decay-resistant species, and a 2-inch (5 1 mm) nominal lumber band joist bearing on a sill plate or wall plate shall be constructed with 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) lag screws or bolts with washers in accordance with Table RS07 .2. Lag screws, bolts and washers shall be hot-dipped galvanized or stainless steel.
R507.2.1 Placement of lag screws or bolts in deck led≠gers and band joists. The lag screws or bolts in deck led≠gers and band joists shall be placed in accordance with Table RS07.2.1 and Figures RS07.2.1(1) and RS07.2.1(2).
R507.2.2 Alternate deck ledger connections. Deck led≠ger connections not conforming to Table RS07 .2 shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering prac≠tice. Girders supporting deck joists shall not be supported on deck ledgers or band joists. Deck ledgers shall not be supported on stone or masonry veneer.
R507 .2.3 Deck lateral load connection. The lateral load connection required by Section RS07 .1 shall be permitted to be in accordance with Figure RS07.2.3. Where the lat≠eral load connection is provided in accordance with Figure


4-NO. 8 SCREWS THROUGH EACH LEG OF CLIP ANGLE (ONE SIDE OF CONNECTION) MINIMUM LENGTH EQUALS JOIST WEB DEPTH MINUS '1, IN.

I
J""-----TRIMMER JOIST,
2-C-SHAPES AND A TRACK
2-NO. 8 SCREWS THROUGH
,. /

...._ --WEBS AT 24 IN. ON CENTER (TYP.)
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.
FIGURE R505.3.8(4) COLD-FORMED STEEL FLOOR CONSTRUCTION: FLOOR HEADER TO TRIMMER CONNECTION-S-FOOT OPENING FLOORS
507.2.3, hold-down tension devices shall be installed in R507.3 Wood/plastic composites. Wood/plastic composites
not less than two locations per deck, and each device shall used in exterior deck boards, stair treads, handrails and
have an allowable stress design capacity of not less than guardrail systems shall bear a label indicating the required
1500 pounds (6672 N).

TABLE R507.2
FASTENER SPACING FOR A SOUTHERN PINE OR HEM-FIR DECK LEDGER AND
A 2-INCH-NOMINAL SOLID-SAWN SPRUCE-PINE-FIR BAND JOIST"∑1∑ 9
(Deck live load = 40 psf, deck dead load = 10 psf)

'

6' and less
12'1" to 14 ' 14'1" to 16 ' 16'1" to 18 ' Connection details
JOIST SPAN
6'1" to a 8'1" to 10 ' 10'1" to 12 '
On-center spacing of fastenersï∑ ï
1/2 inch diameter lag screw with 15/2inch
323 15 1130
18
13 10

maximum sheathingï 1/2 inch diameter bolt with 15/2inch maximum
329 24 2136 36

34
19sheathing

()

1/2 inch diameter bolt with 15/32inch maximum
29
24 21 1836 36 16sheathing and lfz inch stacked washers b. h

b.
The maximum gap between the face of the ledger board and face of the wall sheathing shall be 1/2 inch.

c.
Ledgers shall be flashed to prevent water from contacting the house band joist.

d.
Lag screws and bolts shall be staggered in accordance with Section R507 .2.1.

e. 	
Deck ledger shall be mininlum 2 x 8 pressure-preservative-treated No. 2 grade lumber, or other approved materials as established by standard engineering practice.

f. 	
When solid-sawn pressure-preservative-treated deck ledgers are attached to a mininlum l-inch-thick engineered wood product (structural composite lumber, laminated veneer lumber or wood structural panel band joist), the ledger attachment shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice.

g.
A minimum 1 x 91/2 Douglas Fir laminated veneer lumber rimboard shall be permitted in lieu of the 2-inch nominal band joist.

h.
Wood structural panel sheathing, gypsum board sheathing or foam sheathing not exceeding 1 inch in thickness shall be permitted. The maximum distance between the face of the ledger board and the face of the band joist shall be 1 inch.


0

TABLE 507.2.1
PLACEMENT OF LAG SCREWS AND BOLTS IN DECK LEDGERS AND BAND JOISTS
MINIMUM END AND EDGE DISTANCES AND SPACING BETWEEN ROWS  
TOP EDGE  BOTTOM EDGE  ENDS  ROW SPACING  
Ledger"  2 inchesd  3/4 inch  2 inchesb  15/8 inchesb  
Band Joist"  3/4 inch  2 inches  2 inchesb  15/8 inchesb  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a.
Lag screws or bolts shall be staggered from the top to the bottom along the horizontal run of the deck ledger in accordance with Figure R507.2.1(1).

b.
Maximum 5 inches.

c.
For engineered rim joists, the manufacturer' s recommendations shall govern.

d.
The mininlum distance from bottom row of lag screws or bolts to the top edge of the ledger shall be in accordance with Figure R507.2.1(1).


C)
STAGGER FASTENERS
IN 2 ROWS

5.5" MIN. FOR 2 X 8* *DISTANCE SHALL BE PERMITTED TO6.5" MIN. FOR 2 X 10
BE REDUCED TO 4.5" IF LAG SCREWS ( )FOR 2X 12 ARE USED OR BOLT SPACING IS \______/
0
REDUCED TO THAT OF LAG SCREWS
TO ATTACH 2 X 8 LEDGERS TO 2 X 8
BAND JOISTS.

LEDGER LAG SCREW OR BOLT 3/4'' MIN.
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.  
FIGURE R507.2.1(1)  
PLACEMENT OF LAG SCREWS AND BOLTS IN LEDGERS .  
194  2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE  


FLOORS


0


For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R507.2.1(2)

performance levels and demonstrating compliance with the R507.3.1 Installation of wood/plastic composites. provisions of ASTM D 7032. W oodlplastic composites shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions .

(_)

()


For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
FIGURE 507.2.3 DECK ATTACHMENT FOR LATERAL LOADS
C)

CJ

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

0
0

0

0

*


