---
chapter: Chapter 7
title: WALL COVERING
---

CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE -MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE CHAPTER 7-WALL COVERING 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.)

CHAPTER 7
WALL COVERING


SECTION R701 Table R702.1(2), Table R702.1(3) and Table R702.3.5. Inte≠GENERAL

rior masonry veneer shall

. comply with the requirements of
∑ Section R703.7.1 for support and Section R703.7.4 forR701.1 Application. The provisions
∑ of this. chapter shall
∑
control the design and construction of the interior and exte≠anchorage, except an air space is not required. Interior finishes and materials shall conform to the flame spread and smoke≠
rior wall covering for all buildings.
development requirements of Section R302.9.

R701.2 Installation. Products sensitive to adverse weather
R702.2 Interior plaster.

shall not be installed until adequate weather protection for the installation is provided. Exterior sheathing shall be dry before R702.2.1 Gypsum plaster. Gypsum plaster materials shall applying exterior cover. conform to ASTM C 5, C 22, C 28, C 35, C 59, C 61, C
587, C 631, C 847, C 933, C 1032 and C 1047, and shall be installed or applied in compliance with ASTM C 843 and C
SECTION R702
844. Gypsum lath or gypsum base for veneer plaster shall
INTERIOR COVERING

conform to ASTM C 1396. Plaster shall not be less than
R702.1 General. Interior coverings or wall finishes shall be three coats when applied over metal lath and not less than installed in accordance with this chapter and Table R702.1(1), two coats when applied over other bases permitted by this
TABLE




a.
When measured from back plane of expanded metal lath, exclusive of ribs, or self-furring lath, plaster thickness shall be 3/4 inch mininmm.

b.
When measured from face of support or backing.

c.
Because masonry and concrete surfaces may vary in plane, thickness of plaster need not be unifonu.

d.
When applied over a liquid bonding agent, finish coat may be applied directly to concrete surface.

e.
Approved acoustical plaster may be applied directly to concrete or over base coat plaster, beyond the maximum plaster thickness shown.

f.
Attachment shall be in accordance with Table R702.3.5.

g.
Where gypsum board is used as a base for cement plaster, a water-resistive barrier complying with Section R703.2 shall be provided.







section, except that veneer plaster may be applied in one coat not to exceed \6 inch (4.76 mm) thickness, provided the total thickness is in accordance with Table R702.1(1).
R702.2.2 Cement plaster. Cement plaster materials shall conform to ASTM C 91 (Type M, S or N), C 150 (Type I, II and ill), C 595 [Type IP, I (PM), IS and I (SM), C 847, C 897, C 926, C 933, C 1032, C 1047 and C 1328, and shall be installed or applied in compliance with ASTM C 1063. Gypsum lath shall conform to ASTM C 1396. Plas≠ter shall not be less than three coats when applied over metal lath and not less than two coats when applied over other bases permitted by this section, except that veneer plaster may be applied in one coat not to exceed 3/16 inch
(4.76 mm) thickness, provided the total thickness is in accordance with Table R702.1(1).
R702.2.2.1 Application. Each coat shall be kept in a moist condition for at least 24 hours prior to application of the next coat.
Exception: Applications installed in accordance with ASTM C 926.




R702.2.2.2 Curing. The finish coat for two-coat cement plaster shall not be applied sooner than 48 hours after application of the first coat. For three coat cement plaster the second coat shall not be applied sooner than 24 hours after application of the first coat. The finish coat for three-coat cement plaster shall not
be applied sooner than 48 hours after application of the second coat.


R702.2.3 Support. Support spacing for gypsum or metal
lath on walls or ceilings shall not exceed 16 inches (406
mm) for 3/8-inch-thick (9.5 mm) or 24 inches (610 mm) for
1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) plain gypsum hith. Gypsum lath
shall be installed at right angles to support framing with
end joints in adjacent courses staggered by at least one
framing space.



R702.3 Gypsum board.
R702.3.1 Materials. All gypsum board materials and
accessories shall conform to ASTM C 22, C 475, C 514, C
1002, C 1047, C 1177, C 1178, C 1278, C 1396 or C 1658
and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of










()
TABLE R702.1(2) GYPSUM PLASTER PROPORTIONS"
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 m3, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.
a.
Wood-fibered gypsum plaster may be mixed in the proportions of 100 pounds of gypsum to not more than 1 cubic foot of sand where applied on masonry or concrete.

b. When determining the amount of aggregate in set plaster, a tolerance of 10 percent shall be allowed.


c. 	
Combinations of sand and lightweight aggregate may be used, provided the volume and weight relationship of the combined aggregate to gypsum plaster is maintained.

d.
If used for both first and second coats, the volume of aggregate may be 2.5 cubic feet.

e.
Where plaster is 1 inch or more in total thickness, the proportions for the second coat may be increased to 3 cubic feet.



TABLE CEMENT PLASTER PARTS BY VOLUME




COAT  CEMENT PLASTER TYPE  Portland Cement Type I, II or Ill or Blended Cement Type IP, I (PM), IS or I (SM)  CEMENTITIOUS MATERIALS Plastic Cement  Masonry Cement Type M, S or N  Lime  VOLUME OF AGGREGATE PER SUM OF SEPARATE VOLUMES OF CEMENTITIOUS MATERIALS"  
First  Portland or blended Masonry  1  3/4 -11/2. 1  21/2 -4 21/2 -4  
Plastic  1  21/2 -4  
Second  Portland or blended Masonry  1  1  3/4 -1 1/2  3 -5 3 -5  
Plastic  1  3 -5  
Finish  Portland or blended Masonry  1  1  3/4-2  11/2 -3 1 1/2 -3  
Plastic  1  11/2 -3  


For SI: 1 mch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound = 0.545 kg.
a.
Lime by volume of 0 to 3/4 shall be used when the plaster will be placed over low-absorption surfaces such as dense clay tile or brick.

b.
The same or greater sand proportion shall be used in the second coat than used in the first coat.


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



c;
this section. Adhesives for the installation of gypsum board shall conform to ASTM C 557.
R702.3.2 Wood framing. Wood framing supporting gyp≠sum board shall not be less than 2 inches (5 1 mm) nominal thickness in the least dimension except that wood furring strips not less than l-inch by 2-inch (25 mm by 51 mm) nominal dimension may be used over solid backing or fram≠ing spaced not more than 24 inches (610 mm) on center.
R702.3.3 Cold-formed steel framing. Cold-formed steel framing supporting gypsum board shall not be less than 1 1/4 inches (32 mm) wide in the least dimension. Nonload-bear≠ing cold-formed steel framing shall comply with ASTM C
()
645. Load-bearing cold-formed steel framing and all cold≠formed steel framing from 0.033 inch to 0.112 inch (1 mm to 3 mm) thick shall comply with ASTM C 955.
R702.3.4 Insulating concrete form walls. Foam plastics for insulating concrete form walls constructed in accor-
WALL COVERING
dance with Sections R404.1.2 and R611 on the interior of habitable spaces shall be protected in accordance with Section R316.4. Use of adhesives in conjunction with mechanical fasteners is permitted. Adhesives used for interior and exterior finishes shall be compatible with the insulating form materials.
R702.3.5 Application. Maximum spacing of supports and the size and spacing of fasteners used to attach gypsum board shall comply with Table R702.3.5. Gypsum sheath≠ing shall be attached to exterior walls in accordance with Table R602.3(1). Gypsum board shall be applied at right angles or parallel to framing members. All edges and ends of gypsum board shall occur on the framing members, except those edges and ends that are perpendicular to the framing members. Interior gypsum board shall not be installed where it is directly exposed to the weather or to water.



TABLE R702.3.5
MINIMUM THICKNESS AND APPLICATION OF GYPSUM BOARD


()

0




For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. 	
For application without adhesive, a pair of nails spaced not less than 2 inches apart or more than 21/2 inches apart may be used with the pair of nails spaced 12 inches on center.

b.
Screws shall be in accordance with Section R702.3.6. Screws for attaching gypsum board to structural insulated panels shall penetrate the wood structural panel facing not less than 7/6 inch.

c. 	
Where cold-formed steel framing is used with a clinching design to receive nails by two edges of metal, the nails shall be not less than 5/8 inch longer than the gypsum board thickness and shall have ringed shanks. Where the cold-formed steel framing has a nailing groove formed to receive the nails, the nails shall have barbed shanks or be 5d, 131/2 gage, 15/8 inches long, 15/64-inch head for 1/2-inch gypsum board; and 6d, 13 gage, 1\ inches long, 15/64-inch head for 5/8-inch gypsum board.

d.
Three-eighths-inch-thick single-ply gypsum board shall not be used on a ceiling where a water-based textured finish is to be applied, or where it will be required to support insulation above a ceiling. On ceiling applications to receive a water-based texture material, either hand or spray applied, the gypsum board shall be applied perpendicular to framing. When applying a water-based texture material, the minimum gypsum board thickness shall be increased from 3/8 inch to 1/2 inch for 16-inch on center framing, and from 1/2 inch to 5/8 inch for 24-inch on center framing or 1/2-inch sag-resistant gypsum ceiling board shall be used.

e.
Type X gypsum board for garage ceilings beneath habitable rooms shall be installed perpendicular to the ceiling framing and shall be fastened at maximum 6 inches o.c. by minimum 17/8 inches 6d coated nails or equivalent drywall screws.


1
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE 	411



R702.3.6 Fastening. Screws for attaching gypsum board shower or tub compartment. Cut or exposed edges, includ≠to wood framing shall be Type W or Type S in accordance ing those at wall intersections, shall be sealed as recom≠with ASTM C 1002 and shall penetrate the wood not less mended by the manufacturer.





TABLE R702.3.7
SHEAR CAPACITY FOR HORIZONTAL WOOD-FRAMED GYPSUM BOARD DIAPHRAGM CEILING ASSEMBLIES

MATERIAL  THICKNESS OF MATERIAL (min.) (inch)  SPACING OF FRAMING MEMBERS (max.) (inch)  SHEAR VALUE"∑ b (plf of ceiling)  MINIMUM FASTENER SIZE'∑"  
Gypsum board  1/z  16 o.c.  90  5d cooler or wallboard nail; 15/8-inch long; 0.086-inch shank; 15/64-inch head  
Gypsum board  1/z  24 o.c.  70  5d cooler or wallboard nail; 15/8-inch long; 0.086-inch shank; 15/ 64-inch head  



than \ inch (16 mm). Gypsum board shall be attached to cold-formed steel framing with minimum No. 6 screws. Screws for attaching gypsum board to cold-formed steel framing less than 0.033 inch (1 mm) thick shall be Type S in accordance with ASTM C 1002 or bugle head style in accordance with ASTM C 1513 and shall penetrate the steel not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). Screws for attaching gypsum board to cold-formed steel framing 0.033 inch to
0.112 inch (1 mm to 3 mm) thick shall be in accordance with ASTM C 954 or bugle head style in accordance with ASTM C 1513. Screws for attaching gypsum board to structural insulated panels shall penetrate the wood struc≠tural panel facing not less than 7/16 inch (1 1 mm).
R702.3.7 Horizontal gypsum board diaphragm ceil≠ings. Use of gypsum board shall be permitted on wood joists to create a horizontal diaphragm in accordance with Table R702.3.7. Gypsum board shall be installed perpen≠dicular to ceiling framing members. End joints of adjacent courses of board shall not occur on the same joist. The maximum allowable diaphragm proportions shall be 1 1/2:1 between shear resisting elements. Rotation or cantilever conditions shall not be permitted. Gypsum board shall not be
used in diaphragm ceilings to resist lateral forces imposed by masonry or concrete construction. All perime≠
ter edges shall be blocked using wood members not less than 2-inch by 6-inch (5 1 mm by 152 mm) nominal dimension. Blocking material shall be installed flat over the top plate of the wall to provide a nailing surface not less than 2 inches (5 1 mm) in width for the attachment of the gypsum board.
R702.3.8 Water-resistant gypsmn backing board. Gyp≠sum board used as the base or backer for adhesive applica≠tion of ceramic tile or other required nonabsorbent finish
material shall conform to ASTM C 1396, C 1178 or C1278. Use of water-resistant gypsum backing board shall be permitted on ceilings where framing spacing does not exceed 12 inches (305 mm) on center for 1/2-inch-thick
(12.7 mm) or 16 inches (406 mm) for \-inch-thick (16 mm) gypsum board. Water-resistant gypsum board shall not be installed over a Class I or II vapor retarder in a R702.3.8.1 Limitations. Water resistant gypsum back≠ing board shall not be used where there will be direct exposure to water, or in areas subject to continuous high humidity.


R702.4 Ceramic tile.


R702.4.1 General. Ceramic tile surfaces shall be installed in accordance with ANSI A108.1, A108.4, A108.5, A108.6, A108.11, A118.1, A118.3, A136.1 and A137.1.





R702.4.2 Fiber-cement, fiber-mat reinforced cementi≠tious backer units, glass mat gypsmn backers and fiber-reinforced gypsum backers. Fiber-cement, fiber≠
()

mat reinforced cementitious backer units, glass mat gyp≠sum backers or fiber-reinforced gypsum backers in com≠pliance with ASTM C 1288, C 1325, C 1178 or C 1278, respectively, and installed in accordance with manufactur≠ers' recommendations shall be used as backers for wall tile in tub and shower areas and wall panels in shower areas.



R702.5 Other finishes. Wood veneer paneling and hard≠board paneling shall be placed on wood or cold-formed steel framing spaced not more than 16 inches (406 mm) on center. Wood veneer and hard board paneling less than 1/4-inch (6 mm) nominal thickness shall not have less than a \-inch (10 mm) gypsum board backer. Wood veneer paneling not less than 1/4-inch (6 mm) nominal thickness shall conform to ANSIIHPVA HP-1. Hardboard paneling
shall conform to CPA/ANSI A135.5.
R702.6 Wood shakes and shingles. Wood shakes and shin≠gles shall conform to CSSB Grading Rules for Wood Shakes and Shingles and shall be permitted to be installed directly to the studs with maximum 24 inches (610 mm) on-center spac≠ing.
R702.6.1 Attachment. Nails, staples or glue are permitted for attaching shakes or shingles to the wall, and attach≠ment of the shakes or shingles directly to the surface shall be permitted provided the fasteners are appropriate for the type of wall surface material. When nails or staples are used, two fasteners shall be provided and shall be placed so that they are covered by the course above.




For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per linear foot = 1.488 kg/m.
a.
Values are not cumulative with other horizontal diaphragm values and are for short-term loading caused by wind or seismic loading. Values shall be reduced 25 percent for normal loading.

b.
Values shall be reduced 50 percent in Seismic Design Categories D0, D" D2 and E.

c.
11/4-inch, #6 Type S or W screws may be substituted for the listed nails.

d.
Fasteners shall be spaced not more than 7 inches on center at all supports, including perimeter blocking, and not less than 3/8 inch from the edges and ends of the gypsum board.



2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


0 R702.6.2 Furring strips. Where furring strips are used, they shall be 1 inch by 2 inches or 1 inch by 3 inches (25
mm by 51 mm or 25 nun by 76 mm), spaced a distance on center equal to the desired exposure, and shall be attached to the wall by nailing through other wall material into the studs. R702.7 Vapor retarders. Class I or IT vapor retarders are required on the interior side of frame walls in Climate Zones



14 and 16. See Title 24, Part 6, Figure 100.1-A -California Climate Zones.
Exceptions:
0
1. Basement walls.
2.
Below grade portion of any wall.

3.
Construction where moisture or its freezing will not damage the materials.




R702.7.1 Class ill vapor retarders. Class
ill vapor retarders shall be permitted where any one the following materials are used. The material options include vented cladding over fiberboard, vented cladding over gypsum, or insulated sheathing with an R value equal to or greater than R-4. 1f insulated sheathing is used the R-value shall be included as part of the compliance toward Title 24, Part 6 Building Energy Efficiency Standards.
Spray foam with a minimum density of 2 lb/ff applied to the interior cavity side of OSB, plywood, fiberboard, insu≠
-
lated sheathing or gypsum is deemed to meet the insulated sheathing requirement where the spray foam R-value meets or exceeds the specified insulated sheathing R≠value.

R702.7.2 Material vapor retarder class. The vapor retarder class shall be based on the manufacturer's certi≠fied testing or a tested assembly.
The following shall be deemed to meet the class speci≠fied:
Class I: Sheet polyethylene,, unperforated aluminum foil.

Class IT: Kraft-faced fiberglass batts.

Class ill: Latex or enamel paint.
R702.7.3 Minimum clear air spaces and vented open≠ings for vented cladding. For the purposes of this section, vented cladding shall include the following minimum
clear air spaces. Other openings with the equivalent vent area shall be permitted.
CJ
1. Vinyl lap or horizontal aluminum siding applied over a weather resistive barrier as specified in Table
R703.4.
2.
Brick veneer with a clear airspace as specified in Table R703.7.4.

3.
Other approved vented claddings.



2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE WALL COVERING




SECTION R703 EXTERIOR COVERING


R703.1 General. Exterior walls shall provide the building with a weather-resistant exterior wall envelope. The exterior wall envelope shall include flashing as described in Section R703.8.
R703.1.1 Water resistance. The exterior wall envelope shall be designed and constructed in a manner that pre≠vents the accumulation of water within the wall assembly by providing a water-resistant barrier behind the exterior veneer as required by Section R703.2 and a means of
draining to the exterior water that enters the assembly. Protection against condensation in the exterior wall assem≠bly shall be provided in accordance with the California Energy Code.
Exceptions:
1. A weather-resistant exterior wall envelope shall not be required over concrete or masonry walls designed

in accordance with Chapter 6 and flashed according to Section R703.7 or R703.8.
2. Compliance with the requirements for a means of drainage, and the requirements
of Sections R703.2 and R703.8, shall not be required for an exterior wall envelope that has been demon≠strated to resist wind-driven rain through testing of the exterior wall envelope, including joints, penetrations and intersections with dissimilar materials, in accordance with ASTM E 331 under the following conditions:
2. 1. 	Exterior wall envelope test assemblies shall include at least one opening, one control joint, one wall/eave interface and one wall sill. All tested openings and penetrations shall be representative of the intended end-use configuration.
2.2. 	Exterior wall envelope test assemblies shall be at least 4 feet by 8 feet (1219 mm by 2438 mm) in size.

2.3. 	Exterior wall assemblies shall be tested at a minimum differential pressure of
6.24 pounds per square foot (299 Pa).

2.4. 	Exterior wall envelope assemblies shall be subjected to the minimum test expo≠sure for a minimum of 2 hours.
The exterior wall envelope design shall be considered to resist wind-driven rain where the results of testing indicate that water did not pene≠trate control joints in the exterior wall envelope, joints at the perimeter of openings penetration or intersections of terminations with dissimilar materials.




WALL COVERING
R703.1.2 Wind resistance. Wall coverings, backing materials and their attachments shall be capable of resist≠ing wind loads in accordance with Tables R301.2(2) and R301.2(3). Wind-pressure resistance of the siding and backing materials shall be determined by ASTM E 330 or other applicable standard test methods. Where wind-pres≠sure resistance is determined by design analysis, data from approved design standards and analysis conforming to generally accepted engineering practice shall be used to evaluate the siding and backing material and its fastening. All applicable failure modes including bending rupture of siding, fastener withdrawal and fastener head pull-through shall be considered in the testing or design analysis. Where the wall covering and the backing material resist wind load as an assembly, use of the design capacity of the assembly shall be permitted.
R703.2 Water-resistive barrier. One layer of No. 15 asphalt felt, free from holes and breaks, complying with ASTM D 226 for Type 1 felt or other approved water-resistive barrier shall be applied over studs or sheathing of all exterior walls. Such felt or material shall be applied horizontally, with the upper layer lapped over the lower layer not less than 2 inches (51 mm). Where joints occur, felt shall be lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm). The felt or other approved material shall be continuous to the top of walls and terminated at pen≠
etrations and building appendages in a manner to meet the requirements of the exterior wall envelope as described in Section R703.1.
Exception: Omission of the water-resistive barrier is per≠mitted in the following situations:
1.
In detached accessory buildings.

2.
Under exterior wall finish materials as permitted in Table R703.4.

3.
Under 	paperbacked stucco lath when the paper backing is an approved water-resistive barrier.


R703.3 Wood, hardboard and wood structural panel sid≠ing.
R703.3.1 Panel siding. Joints in wood, hardboard or wood structural panel siding shall be made as follows unless oth≠erwise approved. Vertical joints in panel siding shall occur over framing members, unless wood or wood structural panel sheathing is used, and shall be ship lapped or covered with a batten. Horizontal joints in panel siding shall be lapped a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm) or shall be shi≠plapped or shall be flashed with Z-flashing and occur over solid blocking, wood or wood structural panel sheathing.
R703.3.2 Horizontal siding. Horizontal lap siding shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recom≠mendations. Where there are no recommendations the sid≠ing shall be lapped a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm), or 1/2 inch (13 mm) if rabbeted, and shall have the ends caulked, covered with a batten or sealed and installed over a strip of flashing.







R703.4 Attachments. Unless specified otherwise, all wall coverings shall be securely fastened in accordance with Table R703.4 or with other approved aluminum, stainless steel, zinc-coated or other approved corrosion-resistive fasteners. Where the basic wind speed in accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A is 110 miles per hour (49 m/s) or higher, the attachment of wall coverings shall be designed to resist the component and cladding loads specified in Table R301.2(2), adjusted for height and exposure in accordance with Table R301.2(3).
R703.5 Wood shakes and shingles. Wood shakes and shin≠gles shall conform to CSSB Grading Rules for Wood Shakes
and Shingles.
R703.5.1 Application. Wood shakes or shingles shall be
applied either single-course or double-course over nomi≠
nal 1/2-inch (13 mm) wood-based sheathing or to furring
strips over 1/2-inch (13 mm) nominal nonwood sheathing .
A permeable water-resistive barrier shall be provided over

all sheathing, with horizontal overlaps in the membrane of
not less than 2 inches (5 1 mm) and vertical overlaps of not
less than 6 inches (152 mm). Where furring strips are
used, they shall be 1 inch by 3 inches or 1 inch by 4 inches
(25 mm by 76 mm or 25 mm by 102 mm) and shall be fas≠
tened horizontally to the studs with 7d or 8d box nails and
shall be spaced a distance on center equal to the actual
weather exposure of the shakes or shingles, not to exceed
the maximum exposure specified in Table R703.5.2. The
spacing between adjacent shingles to allow for expansion
shall not exceed 1/4 inch (6 mm), and between adjacent


0

shakes, it shall not exceed 1/2 inch (13 mm). The offset
spacing between joints in adjacent courses shall be a mini≠
mum of 1 1/2 inches (38 mm).

R703.5.2 Weather exposure. The maximum weather
exposure for shakes and shingles shall not exceed that
specified in Table R703.5.2.

TABLE R703.5.2
MAXIMUM WEATHER EXPOSURE FOR WOOD SHAKES AND
SHINGLES ON EXTERIOR WALLSa,b,c
(Dimensions are in inches)

LENGTH  EXPOSURE FOR SINGLE COURSE  EXPOSURE FOR DOUBLE COURSE  
Shinglesï  
16  71/2  12b  
18  81/2  14c  
24  11 1/2  16  
Shakesï  
18  81/2  14  
24  11 1/2  18  



For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a.
Dimensions given are for No. 1 grade.

b.
A maximlffil 10-inch exposure is permitted for No. 2 grade.

c.
A maximim111-inch exposure is permitted for No.2 grade.




2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



WALL COVERING
0 TABLE R703.4 WEATHER-RESISTANT SIDING ATTACHMENT AND MINIMUM THICKNESS
TYPE OF SUPPORTS FOR THE SIDING MATERIAL AND FASTENERSb. c,d WATER-
Wood or wood
NOMINAL FoamJOINT RESISTIVE structural Fiberboard Gypsum Number or SIDING MATERIAL THICKNESS" plastic Direct to TREATMENT BARRIER panel sheathing sheathing spacing of {Inches) sheathing studs
0
REQUIRED sheathing Into into stud into stud fastenersInto stud stud
0.120 nail 0.120 nail 0.120 nail 0.120 NotLap Yes
Without 0.019f 11/t long 2" long 2" long nailY allowed insulation 0.024
0.120 nail 0.120nail 0.120nail 0.120 Not Same as stud Horizonal Lap Yes 11/t long 2" long 2" lohg naiF allowed
spacing With 0.120nail Q.120nail 0.120 nail 0.120 0.120 nail
aluminume 0.019 Lap Yes
insulation 11/t long 21/t long 21/t long nailY 11/t long Anchored veneer:
Section
brick, concrete, 2 Yes See Section R703 and Figure R703.7g
R703 masonry or stone
Adhered veneer:
Section Yes
-
concrete, stone or See Section R703.6.1 gorin accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
R703 Note w
masonryw
Hardboardk 6" panel edges
Yes Note m Note m Note m Note m Note m
\6
Panel siding-vertical -12" inter. sup.n
0

Hardboardk Lap-siding-horizontal
Steelh
Particleboard panels
Wood structural paneli ANSI/APA-PRP 210 siding (exterior grade)
Wood structural panel lap siding
Vinyl siding
Woo&
%Min
rustic, drop
'116
29 ga.
3/8 -1/2
5/8 % 1,2
_ 3/8 -1/2
0.035
Lap
Note p
Lap

-
-
Note p
Note p
Note x

Lap

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes Yes Yes
Yes
Note o Note o Note o
0.113 nail 0.113 nail 0.113 nail
13/t Staple-23/t Sta-21ft Sta≠13/:' ple-21/t ple-2\"
6dboxnail 6dboxnail 6d box nail (2"x (2"x(2" X 0.099'')

0.099'') 0.099'') 8d box nail 8d box nail 6d box nail (21/t x (21/t x (2" X 0.099'')

0.113'') 0.113'')
0.113 nail-0.113 nail≠0.099 nail-2 " 21tt 2 1ft

0.113 nail-0.113 nail≠0.099 nail-2 " 21tt 2 1ft

0.120 nail 0.120nail 0.120 nail (shank) (shank)(shank) with a with a with a 0.3 13 0.313head 0.313head head or or 16-gage or 16-gage 16-gage staple with staple with staple with 3/8 to %to t/2≠% to1/2-inch 1/2-inch inchcrownY∑ ï crownY crownY

Fastener penetration into stud-1"
(continued)
Note o
0.113 nailï Stapleï
box nailï
box nailï
0. 113 nail"
0. 113 nailX
0.120 nail (shank) with a 0.313 head per Section R703.11.2
Note o

Not
allowed

6d box nail
(2" x
0.099''),
3/8 not
allowed

6d box nail
(2'"' X
0.099'')

0.099 nail-2"
0.099 nail-2"
Not allowed
0. 113 nail-21/t Staple-2" Same as stud spacing 2 per bearing

Same as stud spacing

6" panel edge,
12" inter. sup.
6"

panel edges,
12" inter. sup.

I
8" along bottom edge

16 inches on center or speci fled by the manufacturer instructions or test report
Face nailing up to 6 " widths, 1 nail per bear≠ing; 8" widths and over, 2 nails per bearing
TABLE R703.4-continued WEATHER-RESISTANT SIDING ATTACHMENT AND MINIMUM THICKNESS
()

SIDING MATERIAL Shiplap Bevel Butt tip  NOMINAL THICKNESS" (inches) 19/32 Average 7/16 3/16  JOINT TREATMENT Lap Lap  WATER≠RESISTIVE BARRIER REQUIRED Yes Yes  TYPE OF SUPPORTS FOR THE SIDING MATERIAL AND FASTENERS"∑ c.d Wood or wood Fiberboard Gypsum Foam plastic Number or Direct to structural panel sheathing Into sheathing sheathing spacing of sheathing Into stud stud into stud into stud studs fasteners Face nailing up to 6" 0. 113 widths, 1 Fastener penetration into stud-1 " nail-21/t nail per bearing; 8" Staple-2" widths and over, 2 nails per bearing  
Fiber cement panel sidingq  5116  Note q  Yes Note u  6d common corrosion-resistant nail'  6d 6d 6d 4d 6 " o.c. on common common common edges, 12" o.c.common corrosion-corrosion-corrosion-corrosion-resistant resistant resistant on intermed. resistant nail' nail' nail'∑ ï nail' studs  
Fiber cement lap siding'  5/16  Note s  Yes Note u  6d common corrosion-resistant nail'  6d 6d 6d common 6d common common common corrosion-corrosion-corrosion-corrosion-resistant Note t resistant nail' resistant resistant nail or 11-nail' nail'∑ ï gage roof≠ing nail'  


0


For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a.
Based on stud spacing of 16 inches on center where studs are spaced 24 inches, siding shall be applied to sheathing approved for that spacing.

b.
Nail is a general description and shall be T -head, modified rotmd head, or rotmd head with smooth or deformed shanks.

c.
Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/6-inch outside diameter and be manufactured of minimum 16-gage wire.

d.
Nails or staples shall be aluminum, galvanized, or rust-preventative coated and shall be driven into the studs where fiberboard, gypsum, or foam plastic


1
0

sheathing backing is used. Where wood or wood structural panel sheathing is used, fasteners shall be driven into studs unless otherwise permitted to be
driven into sheathing in accordance with the siding manufacturer's installation instructions.



e.
Aluminum nails shall be used to attach altm!inum siding.

f.
Aluminum (0.019 inch) shall be tmbacked only when the maximum panel width is 10 inches and the maximum flat area is 8 inches. The tolerance for
aluminum siding shall be +0.002 inch of the nominal dimension.


g.
All attachments shall be coated with a corrosion-resistant coating.

h.
Shall be of approved type.

i.
Three-eighths-inch plywood shall not be applied directly to studs spaced more than 16 inches on center when long dimension is parallel to studs. Plywood 1/2≠


inch or thinner shall not be applied directly to studs spaced more than 24 inches on center. The stud spacing shall not exceed the panel span rating provided by
∑ the manufacturer unless the panels are installed with the face grain perpendicular to the studs or over sheathing approved for that stud spacing.

j.
Wood board sidings applied vertically shall be nailed to horizontal nailing strips or blocking set 24 inches on center. Nails shall penetrate 11/2 inches into
studs, studs and wood sheathing combined or blocking.


k.
Hardboard siding shall comply with CPA/ANSI A135.6.

I.
Vinyl siding shall comply with ASTM D 3679.

m. 	
Minimum shank diameter of 0.092 inch, minimum head diameter of 0.225 inch, and nail length must accommodate sheathing and penetrate framing 11/2 inches.

n.
When used to resist shear forces, the spacing must be 4 inches at panel edges and 8 inches on interior supports.



0

o. Minimum shank diameter of 0.099 inch, minimum head diameter of 0.240 inch, and nail length must accommodate sheathing and penetrate framing 11/2
inches.
p.
Vertical end joints shall occur at studs and shall be covered with a joint cover or shall be caulked.

q.
See Section R703.10.1.

r.
Fasteners shall comply with the nominal dimensions in ASTM F 1667.

s.
See Section R703.10.2.

t.
Face nailing: one 6d common nail through the over lap ping planks at each stud. Concealed nailing: one 11 gage 11/2 inch long galv. roofing nail through the


∑


top edge of each plank at each stud.


u.
See Section R703.2 exceptions.

v.
Minimum nail length must accommodate sheathing and penetrate framing 11/2 inches.

w.
Adhered masonry veneer shall comply with the requirements of Section R703.6.3 and shall comply with the requirements in Sections 6.1 and 6.3 of TMS≠402 ACI 530/ASCE 5.


x.
Vertical joints, if staggered shall be permitted to be away from studs if applied over wood structural panel sheathing.

y.
Minim1m1 fastener length must accommodate sheathing and penetrate framing 0.75 inches or in accordance with the manufacturer' s installation instructions.

z.
Where approved by the manufacturer's instructions or test report siding shall be permitted to be installed with fasteners penetrating not less than 0. 7 5 inches


∑

through wood or wood structural sheathing with or without penetration into the framing.




2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE




0 R703.5.3 Attachment. Each shake or shingle shall be held in place by two hot-dipped zinc-coated, stainless steel, or
0
aluminum nails or staples. The fasteners shall be long enough to penetrate the sheathing or furring strips by a minimum of 1/2 inch (13 mm) and shall not be overdriven. R703.5.3.1 Staple attachment. Staples shall not be less than 16 gage and shall have a crown width of not less than 7/16 inch (11 mm), and the crown of the staples
shall be parallel with the butt of the shake or shingle. In single-course application, the fasteners shall be con≠cealed by the course above and shall be driven approxi≠
mately 1 inch (25 mm) above the butt line of the succeeding course and 3/4 inch (19 mm) from the edge. In double-course applications, the exposed shake or
() shingle shall be face-nailed with two casing nails, driven approximately 2 inches (5 1 mm) above the butt line and 3/4 inch (19 mm) from each edge. In all applica≠tions, staples shall be concealed by the course above. With shingles wider than 8 inches (203 mm) two addi≠tional nails shall be required and shall be nailed approx≠imately 1 inch (25 mm) apart near the center of the shingle. R703.5.4 Bottom courses. The bottom courses shall be doubled. R703.6 Exterior plaster. Installation of these materials shall

be in compliance with ASTM C 926 and ASTM C 1063 and the provisions of this code.
R703.6.1 Lath. All lath and lath attachments shall be of corrosion-resistant materials. Expanded metal or woven wire lath shall be attached with 1 1/2-inch-long (38 mm), 11 gage nails having a \6-inch (11.1 mm) head, or 7/8-inch≠long (22.2 mm), 16 gage staples, spaced at no more than 6 inches (152 mm), or as otherwise approved.
R703.6.2 Plaster. Plastering with portland cement plaster shall be not less than three coats when applied over metal lath or wire lath and shall be not less than two coats when applied over masonry, concrete, pressure-preservative treated wood or decay-resistant wood as specified in Sec≠tion R317 .1 or gypsum backing. If the plaster surface is completely covered by veneer or other facing material or is completely concealed, plaster application need be only two coats, provided the total thickness is as set forth in Table R702.1(1).

On wood-frame construction with an on-grade floor slab system, exterior plaster shall be applied to cover, but not extend below, lath, paper and screed.
The proportion of aggregate to cementitious materials

I \
shall be as set forth in Table R702.1(3).
R703.6.2.1 Weep screeds. A minimum 0.019-inch (0.5 mm) (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage), corrosion-resis≠tant weep screed or plastic weep screed, with a mini≠mum vertical attachment flange of 3 1/2 inches (89 mm) shall be provided at or below the foundation plate line on exterior stud walls in accordance with ASTM C 926. The weep screed shall be placed a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) above the earth or 2 inches (51 mm) above








WALL COVERING
paved areas and shall be of a type that will allow trapped water to drain to the exterior of the building. The weather-resistant barrier shall lap the attachment flange. The exterior lath shall cover and terminate on the attachment flange of the weep screed.

R703.6.3 Water-resistive barriers. Water-resistive barri≠ers shall be installed as required in Section R703 .2 and, where applied over wood-based sheathing, shall include a water-resistive vapor-permeable barrier with a perfor≠mance at least equivalent to two layers of Grade D paper. The individual layers shall be installed independently such that each layer provides a separate continuous plane and any flashing (installed in accordance with Section R703.8) intended to drain to the water-resistive barrier is directed between the layers.
Exception: Where the water-resistive barrier that is applied over wood-based sheathing has a water resis≠tance equal to or greater than that of 60-minute Grade D paper and is separated from the stucco by an inter≠vening, substantially nonwater-absorbing layer or


designed drainage space. R703.6.4 Application. Each coat shall be kept in a moist condition for at least 48 hours prior to application of the next coat.
Exception: Applications installed in accordance with
ASTM C926. R703.6.5 Curing. The finish coat for two-coat cement plaster shall not be applied sooner than seven days after application of the first coat. For three-coat cement plaster, the second coat shall not be applied sooner than 48 hours after application of the first coat. The finish coat for three≠coat cement plaster shall not be applied sooner than seven days after application of the second coat.
R703.7 Stone and masonry veneer, general. Stone and masonry veneer shall be installed in accordance with this chapter, Table R703.4 and Figure R703.7. These veneers installed over a backing of wood or cold-formed steel shall be limited to the first story above-grade plane and shall not exceed 5 inches (127 mm) in thickness. See Section R602.10 for wall bracing requirements for masonry veneer for wood≠framed construction and Section R603.9.5 for wall bracing requirements for masonry veneer for cold-formed steel con≠struction.
Exceptions:

1.
For all buildings in Seismic Design Categories A, B and C, exterior stone or masonry veneer, as speci≠fied in Table R703.7(1), with a backing of wood or steel framing shall be permitted to the height speci≠fied in Table R703.7(1) above a noncombustible foundation.

2.
For detached one-or two-family dwellings in Seis≠mic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, exterior stone or masonry veneer, as specified in Table R703.7(2), with a backing of wood framing shall be permitted to the height specified in Table R703 .7(2) above a noncombustible foundation.








METAL TIEb WATER-RESISTIVE BARR I ERb
1-IN. AIR SPACE 1-IN. GROUTED SPACE MASONRY VENEER FLASHING ≠
II II Ill
Ill II


WALLBOARD
WATER-RESISTIVE BARRIERï
SHEATHING
ANCHOR BOLT
GROUTED FULL




For SI: 1 inch = 24.5 mm.
FIGURE R703.7 MASONRY VENEER WALL DETAILS
(continued)


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

418
()
0
0




WALL COVERING

WALLBOARD
INSUALTION BETWEEN STUDS





For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 nnn.
a.
See Sections R703.7.5, R703.7.6 and R703.8.

b.
See Sections R703.2 and R703.7 .4.

c.
See Section R703.7.4.2 and Table R703.7.4.

d.
See Section R703.7.3.




FIGURE R703.7-continued MASONRY VENEER WALL DETAILS WALL COVERING

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.479 k:Pa.
a.
An additional& feet is pennitted for gable end walls. See also story height limitations of Section R301.3.

b.
Maximum weight is installed weight and includes weight of mortar, grout, lath and other materials used for installation. Where veneer is placed on both faces of a wall, the combined weight shall not exceed that specified in this table.




TABLE R703.7(2)
STONE OR MASONRY VENEER LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS,
ONE-AND TWO-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS, WOOD FRAMING, SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORIES D0, D1 AND D2

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY  NUMBER OF WOOD FRAMED STORIES"  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF VENEER ABOVE NONCOMBUSTIBLE FOUNDATION OR FOUNDATION WALL (feet)  MAXIMUM NOMINAL THICKNESS OF VENEER (inches)  MAXIMUM WEIGHT OF VENEER (psf)b  
1  20"  4  40  
Do  2  20"  4  40  
3  30d  4  40  
1  20c  4  40  
D,  2  20c  4  40  
3  20c  4  40  
D2  1 2  20c 20c  3 3  30 30  

0


For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.479 k:Pa, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.
a.
Cripple walls are not permitted in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2ï

b.
Maximum weight is installed weight and includes weight of mortar, grout and lath, and other materials used for installation.

c. 	
The veneer shall not exceed 20 feet in height above a noncombustible foundation, with an additional 8 feet pennitted for gable end walls, or 30 feet in height with an additional 8 feet for gable end walls where the lower 10 feet has a backing of concrete or masonry wall. See also story height limitations of Section R301.3.

d.
The veneer shall not exceed 30 feet in height above a noncombustible foundation, with an additional& feet pennitted for gable end walls. See also story height



0

limitations of Section R301.3.
R703.7.1 Interior veneer support. Veneers used as inte≠construction and the veneer supported by the foundation.
rior wall finishes shall be permitted to be supported on The wood or cold-formed steel construction supporting the
wood or cold-formed steel floors that are designed to sup-masonry veneer shall be designed to limit the deflection to
port the loads imposed. ∑ 1/600 of the span for the supporting members. The design of
the wood or cold-formed steel construction shall consider

R703. 7.2 Exterior veneer support. Except in Seismic
the weight of the veneer and any other loads.
Design Categories D0, and D2, exterior masonry
D1
veneers having an installed weight of 40 pounds per R703.7 .2.1 Support by steel angle. A minimum 6
2
square foot (195 kg/m) or less shall be permitted to be inches by 4 inches by \6 inch (152 mm by 102 mm by
supported on wood or cold-formed steel construction. 8 mm) steel angle, with the long leg placed vertically,
When masonry veneer supported by wood or cold-formed shall be anchored to double 2 inches by 4 inches (5 1
steel construction adjoins masonry veneer supported by mm by 102 mm) wood studs at a maximum on-center
the foundation, there shall be a movement joint between spacing of 16 inches (406 mm). Anchorage of the steel
the veneer supported by the wood or cold-formed steel angle at every double stud spacing shall be a minimum





2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


0 of two \6 inch (11 mm) diameter by 4 inch (102 mm) lag screws. The steel angle shall have a minimum clear≠ance to underlying construction of 1/6 inch (2 mm). A
1
0
minimum of two-thirds the width of the masonry veneer thickness shall bear on the steel angle. Flashing and weep holes shall be located in the masonry veneer wythe in accordance with Figure R703.7.2.1. The max≠imum height of masonry veneer above the steel angle
support shall be 12 feet, 8 inches (3861 mm). The air space separating the masonry veneer from the wood backing shall be in accordance with Sections R703.7.4 and R703.7.4.2. The met:Qod of support for the masonry veneer on wood construction shall be constructed in accordance with Figure R703.7.2.1.
fJ-
\ ' The maximum slope of the roof construction with≠out stops shall be 7:12. Roof construction with slopes greater than 7:12 but not more than 12:12 shall have stops of a minimum 3 inch by 3 inch by 1/4 inch (76 mm by 76 mm by 6 mm) steel plate welded to the angle at 24 inches (610 mm) on center along the angle or as approved by the building official.




SUPPORT BY STEEL ANGLE
FIGURE R703.7.2.1 EXTERIOR MASONRY VENEER SUPPORT BY STEEL ANGLES
R703. 7 .2.2 Support by roof construction. A steel
angle shall be placed directly on top of the roof con≠
struction. The roof supporting construction for the steel
t:J angle shall consist of a minimum of three 2 inch by 6 inch (51 mm by 152 mm) wood members. The wood member abutting the vertical wall stud construction shall be anchored with a minimum of three 5/8-inch (16 mm) diameter by 5-inch (127 mm) lag screws to every wood stud spacing. Each additional roof member shall be anchored by the use of two 10d nails at every wood stud spacing. A minimum of two-thirds the width of the masonry veneer thickness shall bear on the steel angle. Flashing and weep holes shall be located in the

WALL COVERING
masonry veneer wythe in accordance with Figure R703.7.2.2. The maximum height of the masonry veneer above the steel angle support shall be 12 feet, 8 inches (3861 mm). The air space separating the masonry veneer from the wood backing shall be in accordance with Sections R703.7.4 and R703.7.4.2. The support for the masonry veneer on wood construc≠tion shall be constructed in accordance with Figure R703.7.2.2.
The maximum slope of the roof construction with≠out stops shall be 7:12. Roof construction with slopes greater than 7:12 but not more than 12:12 shall have stops of a minimum 3 inch by 3 inch by 1/4 inch (76 mm by 76 mm by 6 mm) steel plate welded to the angle at 24 inches (610 mm) on center along the angle or as approved by the building official.







R703.7.3 Lintels. Masonry veneer shall not support any vertical load other than the dead load of the veneer above. Veneer above openings shall be supported on lintels of noncombustible materials. The lintels shall have a length of bearing not less than 4 inches (102 mm). Steel lintels shall be shop coated with a rust-inhibitive paint, except for lintels made of corrosion-resistant steel or steel treated with coatings to provide corrosion resistance. Construc≠tion of openings shall comply with either Section R703.7.3.1 or 703.7.3.2.
R703.7.3.1 Allowable span. The allowable span shall not exceed the values set forth in Table R703.7.3.1.
R703.7.3.2 Maximum span. The allowable span shall not exceed 18 feet 3 inches (5562 mm) and shall be constructed to comply with Figure R703.7.3.2 and the following:
1. Provide a 	minimum length of 18 inches ( 457 mm) of masonry veneer on each side of opening as shown in Figure R703.7.3.2.



2.
Provide a minimum 5-inch by 3 1/2-inch by 5/16≠inch (127 mm by 89 mm by 7.9 mm) steel angle above the opening and shore for a minimum of 7 days after installation.

3. 	
Provide double-wire joint reinforcement extend≠ing 12 inches (305 mm) beyond each side of the opening. Lap splices of joint reinforcement a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm). Comply with one of the following:


3.1. Double-wire joint reinforcement shall be 3/16≠inch (4.8 mm) diameter and shall be placed in the first two bed joints above the opening.
3.2. Double-wire joint reinforcement shall be 9 gauge (0.144 inch or 3.66 mm diameter) and shall be placed in the first three bed joints above the opening.

4. 	
Provide the height of masonry veneer above opening, in accordance with Table R703.7.3.2.


TABLE R703.7.3.2 HEIGHT OF MASONRY VENEER ABOVE OPENING
MINIMUM HEIGHT OF MASONRY VENEER ABOVE OPENING (INCH)  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF MASONRY VENEER ABOVE OPENING (FEET)  
13  <5  
24  5 to < 12  
60  12 to height above support .ï allowed by Section R703.7  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 nun, 1 foot = 304.8 nun.
R703.7.4 Anchorage. Masonry veneer shall be anchored to the supporting wall studs with corrosion-resistant metal ties embedded in mortar or grout and extending into the veneer a minimum of 1 1/2 inches (38 mm), with not less than \-inch (15.9 mm) mortar or grout cover to outside face. Masonry veneer shall conform to Table R703.7.4.

R703.7.4.1 Size and spacing. Veneer ties, if strand wire, shall not be less in thickness than No. 9 U.S. gage [(0.148 inch) (4 mm)] wire and shall have a hook embedded in the mortar joint, or if sheet metal, shall be not less than No. 22 U.S. gage by [(0.0299 inch) (0.76 mm)] 7/8 inch (22 mm) corrugated. Each tie shall sup≠2
port not more than 2.67 square feet (0.25 m ) of wall area and shall be spaced not more than 32 inches (813 mm) on center horizontally and 24 inches (635 mm) on center vertically.

Exception: In Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2 or townhouses in Seismic Design Category C or in wind areas of more than 30 pounds per square foot pressure (1.44 kPa), each tie shall support not
2
more than 2 square feet (0.2 m ) of wall area.
R703.7.4.1.1 Veneer ties around wall openings.
Additional metal ties shall be provided around all wall openings greater than 16 inches (406 mm) in either dimension. Metal ties around the perimeter of openings shall be spaced not more than 3 feet (9144 mm) on center and placed within 12 inches (305 mm) of the wall opening.
..






For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 nun, 1 foot = 304.8 nun.
FIGURE R703.7.3.2 MASONRY VENEER OPENING



TABLE R703.7.3.1
ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR LINTELS SUPPORTING MASONRY VENEERa,b,c,d

SIZE OF STEEL ANGLE"∑ c, d (inches)  NO STORY ABOVE  ONE STORY ABOVE  TWO STORIES ABOVE  NO. OF 1/2-INCH OR EQUIVALENT REINFORCING BARS IN REINFORCED LINTEL ï∑ d  
3 x 3 x1/4  6'-0 "  4'-6 "  3'-0"  1  
4 x 3 x1/4  8'-0"  6'-0 "  4'-6"  1  
5 x 31/2x\6  10'-0 "  8'-0"  6'-0 "  2  
6 X 31/2 X 5/16  14'-0"  9'-6 "  7'-0 "  2  
2-6 X 31/2X 5/16  20'-0 "  12'-0 "  9'-6 "  4  



For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 nun, 1 foot = 304.8 nun.
a.
Long leg of the angle shall be placed in a vertical position.

b.
Depth of reinforced lintels shall not be less than 8 inches and all cells of hollow masonry lintels shall be grouted solid. Reinforcing bars shall extend not less than 8 inches into the support.

c. 	
Steel members indicated are adequate typical examples; other steel members meeting structural design requirements may be used.

d.
Either steel angle or reinforced lintel shall span opening.



2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

BACKING AND TIE  MINIMUM TIE  MINIMUM TIE FASTENERï  AIR SPACE  
Wood stud backing with corrugated sheet metal  22 U.S. gage (0.0299 in.) x 7/8 in. wide  8d common nail b (21/2 in. x 0. 131 in.)  Nominal 1 in. between sheathing and veneer  
Wood stud backing with metal strand wire Cold-formed steel stud backing with adjustable metal strand wire  W1.7 (No. 9 U.S. gage; 0. 148 in.) with hook embedded in mortar joint W1.7 (No. 9 U.S. gage; 0. 148 in.) with hook embedded in mortar joint  8d common nail b (21/2 in. x 0. 131 in.) No. 10 screw extending through the steel framing a minimum of three exposed threads  Minimum nomina1 1 in. Maximum 41/2 in. between between sheathing and veneer backing and veneer Minimum nomina1 1 in. between sheathing and Maximum 41/2 in. between veneer backing and veneer  


WALL COVERING


0
0




(


TABLE R703.7.4
TIE ATTACHMENT AND AIR SPACE REQUIREMENTS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a.
∑In Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2, the minimum tie fastener shall be an 8d ring-shank nail (21/2 in. X 0.131 in.) or a No. 10 screw extending through the steel framing a minimum of three exposed threads.

b.
All fasteners shall have rust-inhibitive coating suitable for the installation in which they are being used, or be manufactured from material not susceptible to



corrosion.
R703.7.4.2 Grout fill. As an alternative to the air space required by Table R703.7.4, grout shall be permitted to fill the air space. When the air space is filled with grout, a water-resistive barrier is required over studs or sheathing. When filling the air space, replacing the sheathing and water-resistive barrier with a wire mesh and approved water-resistive barrier or an approved water-resistive barrier-backed reinforcement attached directly to the studs is permitted.
R703.7.5 Flashing. Flashing shall be located beneath the first course of masonry above fmished ground level above the foundation wall or slab and at other points of support, including structural floors, shelf angles and lintels when masonry veneers are designed in accordance with Section R703.7. See Section R703.8 for additional requirements.
R703. 7.6 W eepholes. Weep holes shall be provided in the outside wythe of masonry walls at a maximum spacing of 33 inches (838 mm) on center. Weepholes shall not be less than 3/16 inch (5 mm) in diameter. Weepholes shall be located immediately above the flashing.
R703.8 Flashing. Approved corrosion-resistant flashing shall be applied shingle-fashion in a manner to prevent entry of water into the wall cavity or penetration of water to the build≠ing structural framing components. Self-adhered membranes used as flashing shall comply with AAMA 711. The flashing shall extend to the surface of the exterior wall fmish. Approved corrosion-resistant flashings shall be installed at all of the following locations:
1. 	Exterior window and door openings. Flashing at exte≠rior window and door openings shall extend to the sur≠face of the exterior wall finish or to the water-resistive barrier for subsequent drainage. Flashing at exterior window and door openings shall be installed in accor≠dance with one or more of the following:
1.1. The fenestration manufacturer's installation and flashing instructions, or for applications not addressed in the fenestration manufacturer's instructions, in accordance with the flashing manufacturer's instructions. Where flashing instructions or details are not provided, pan flashing shall be installed at the sill of exterior window and door openings. Pan flashing shall be sealed or sloped in such a manner as to direct water to the surface of the exterior wall fmish or to the water-resistive barrier for subsequent



drainage. Openings using pan flashing shall also incorporate flashing or protection at the head
and sides.


1.2. In accordance with the flashing design or method of a registered design professional.
1.3.
In accordance with other approved methods.


2. 	
At the intersection of chimneys or other masonry con≠struction with frame or stucco walls, with projecting lips on both sides under stucco copings.

3.
Under and at the ends of masonry, wood or metal cop≠ings and sills.

4.
Continuously above all projecting wood trim.




∑

5. 	
Where exterior porches, decks or stairs attach to a wall or floor assembly of wood-frame construction.

6.
At wall and roof intersections.

7.
At built-in gutters.







R703.9 Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS)/EIFS with drainage. Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS) shall comply with this chapter and Sections R703.9.1 and R703.9.3. EIFS with drainage shall comply with this chapter and Sections R703.9.2, R703.9.3 and R703.9.4.
R703.9.1 Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS).
EIFS shall comply with ASTM E 2568.

R703.9.2 Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS) with drainage. EIFS with drainage shall comply with ASTM E 2568 and shall have an average minimum drain≠age efficiency of 90 percent when tested in accordance with ASTM E 2273.
R703.9.2.1 Water-resistive barrier. The water-resis≠tive barrier shall comply with Section R703.2 or ASTM E2570.
R703.9.2.2 Installation. The water-resistive barrier shall be applied between the EIFS and the wall sheath≠ing.









WALL COVERING
R703.9.3 Flashing, general. Flashing of EIFS shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section R703.8.
R703.9.4 EIFS/EIFS with drainage installation. All EIFS shall be installed in accordance with the manufac≠turer's installation instructions and the requirements of this section.
R703.9.4.1 Terminations. The EIFS shall terminate not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the finished ground level.
R703.9.4.2 Decorative trim. Decorative trim shall not be face nailed though the EIFS.
R703.10 Fiber cement siding.
R703.10.1 Panel siding. Fiber-cement panels shall com≠ply with the requirements of ASTM C 1186, Type A, min≠imum Grade II. Panels shall be installed with the long dimension either parallel or perpendicular to framing. Ver≠tical and horizontal joints shall occur over framing mem≠

bers and shall be sealed with caulking, covered with
or shall be designed to comply with Section R703.1. Panel siding shall be installed with fasteners according to Table R703.4 or approved manufacturer's installation instructions.
R703.10.2 Lap siding. Fiber-cement lap siding having a maximum width of 12 inches shall comply with the requirements of ASTM C 1186, Type A, minimum Grade
II. Lap siding shall be lapped a minimum of 1 1/4 inches (32 mm) and lap siding not having tongue-and-groove end joints shall have the ends sealed with caulking, installed with an H-section joint cover, located over a strip of flash≠ing or shall be designed to comply with Section R703.1. Lap siding courses may be installed with the fastener heads exposed or concealed, according to Table R703.4 or approved manufacturers' installation instructions.
R703.11 Vinyl siding. Vinyl siding shall be certified and labeled as conforming to the requirements of ASTM D 3679 by an approved quality control agency.
R703.11.1 Installation. Vinyl siding, soffit and accesso≠ries shall be installed in accordance with the manufac≠turer's installation instructions.
R703.11.1.1 Vinyl soffit panels. Soffit panels shall be individually fastened to a supporting component such as a nailing strip, fascia or subfascia component or as specified by the manufacturer's instructions.
R703.11.2 Foam plastic sheathing. Vinyl siding used with foam plastic sheathing shall be installed in accor≠dance with Section R703.11.2.1, R703.11.2.2, or R703.11.2.3.
Exception: Where the foam plastic sheathing is applied directly over wood structural panels, fiberboard, gyp≠sum sheathing or other approved backing capable of independently resisting the design wind pressure, the vinyl siding shall be installed in accordance with Sec≠tion R703.11.1.
R703.11.2.1 Basic wind speed not exceeding 90 miles per hour and Exposure Category B. Where the basic




wind speed does not exceed 90 miles per hour (40 m/s), the Exposure Category is B and gypsum wall board or equivalent is installed on the side of the wall opposite the foam plastic sheathing, the minimum siding fas≠tener penetration into wood framing shall be 1 1/4 inches (32 mm) using minimum 0.120-inch diameter nail (shank) with a minimum 0.313-inch diameter head, 16
inches on center. The foam plastic sheathing shall be minimum 1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) (nominal) extruded polystyrene per ASTM C 578, 1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) (nominal) polyisocyanurate per ASTM C 1289, or l≠inch-thick (25 mm) (nominal) expanded polystyrene per ASTM C 578.
R703.11.2.2 Basic wind speed exceeding 90 miles per hour or Exposure Categories C and D. Where the basic wind speed exceeds 90 miles per hour (40 m/s) or the Exposure Category is C or D, or all conditions of Section R703.11.2.1 are not met, the adjusted design pressure rating for the assembly shall meet or exceed the loads listed in Tables R301.2(2) adjusted for height and exposure using Table R301.2(3). The design wind pressure rating of the vinyl siding for installation over solid sheathing as provided in the vinyl siding manu≠facturer's product specifications shall be adjusted for the following wall assembly conditions:

1. For wall assemblies with foam plastic sheathing on the exterior side and gypsum wall board or equivalent on the interior side of the wall, the vinyl siding's design wind pressure rating shall
0
be multiplied by 0.39.
2. For wall assemblies with foam plastic sheathing on the exterior side and no gypsum wall board or equivalent on the interior side of wall, the vinyl siding's design wind pressure rating shall be mul≠tiplied by 0.27.
R703.11.2.3 Manufacturer specification. Where the vinyl siding manufacturer's product specifications pro≠vide an approved design wind pressure rating for instal≠lation over foam plastic sheathing, use of this design wind pressure rating shall be permitted and the siding shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.

R703.12 Adhered masonry veneer installation. Adhered masonry veneer shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.




R703.12.1 Clearances. On exterior stud walls, adhered masonry veneer shall be installed:
1.
Minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) above the earth;

2. 	
Minimum of 2 inches (51 mm) above paved areas; or

3.
Minimum of 1/2 inch (12 mm) above exterior walk≠ing surfaces which are supported by the same foun≠dation that supports the exterior wall.



R703.12.2 Flashing at foundation. A corrosion-resistant screed or flashing of a minimum 0.019-inch (0.48 mm) or 26-gage galvanized or plastic with a minimum vertical attachment flange of 31/2 inches (89 mm) shall be installed



2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

0 to extend a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm) below the founda≠tion plate line on exterior stud walls in accordance with
Section R703.8. The war-resistive barrier, as required by
Table R703.4, Footnote w, shall lap over the exterior of
the attachment flange of the screed or flashing.
0
()
0
0
0


WALL COVERING








2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



