---
chapter: Chapter 9
title: ROOF ASSEMBLIES
---

(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.)
Adopting agency  B5C 5FM  HCD 1 2 1/AC  D5A AC 55  1  05HPD 2 3 4  B5CC DH5 AGR DWR CEC  CA  5L  5LC  
Adopt entire chapter  
Adopt Entire Chapter as amended (amended sections listed below)  X  
Adopt only those sections that are listed below  X  

Chapter I Section  
R901. 1  X  
R902 R902. 1. 1 through R902. 4  X X  
R903. 4. 1  X  
R904-904.4  X  
R908 through R908. 1.6  

II



*

SECTION R901 GENERAL
R901.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the design, materials, construction and quality of roof assemblies.
SECTION R902 ROOF CLASSIFICATION

R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905.
A min≠imum Class A, B or C roofing shall be installed in areas des≠ignated by this section. Classes A, B and C roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108.
Exceptions:
1. 	
Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry and exposed concrete roof deck.

2. 	
Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or cop≠per shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate installed on non≠


_

combustible decks.
3. 	Class A roof assemblies include minimum 16 oz/ft2 copper sheets installed over combustible decks.

R902.1.1 Roof coverings within very-high fire hazard ( \ severity zones. The entire roof covering of every existing ) structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof cover≠ing applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the
.. . . .
The Cahfom1a Code of (CCR), Title 19, DIVISIOn 1 provlSlons that are found m the California F1re Code are a repnnt from the current CCR, Title 19, Division 1 text for the code user' s convenience only. The scope, applicability and appeals procedures of CCR, Title 19, Division I remain the same.
CHAPTER 9
ROOF ASSEMBLIES
roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A.
Exception: The requirements shall not apply in any jurisdiction that adopts the model ordinance approved by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Section 51189 of the Government Code or an ordinance that substan≠tially conforms to the model ordinance and transmits a copy to the State Fire Marshal.
R902.1.2 Roof coverings within state responsibility areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof cov≠ering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B.
Exception: Areas designated as moderate fire hazard severity zones.
R902.1.3 Roof coverings in all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing struc≠ture, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class C.
R902.1.4 Roofing requirements a wildland-urban inter≠face fire area. Roofing requirements for structures located in a wildland-urban inteiface fire area shall also comply with Section R327.5.


ROOF ASSEMBLIES
R902.2 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes. Fire≠with a thickness of not less than 0.019 inch (0.5 mm) (No. retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles are wood shakes 26 galvanized sheet).


and shingles complying with UBC Standard 15-3 or 15-4 which are impregnated by the full-cell vacuum-pressure pro≠cess with fire-retardant chemicals, and which have been qualified by UBC Standard 15-2 for use on Class A, B or C roofs. Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles shall comply with 1CC-ES EG107 and with the weathering requirements contained in Health and Safety Code Section 13132. 7 (j). Each bundle shall bear labels from an 1CBQ accredited quality control agency identifying their roof-cov≠ering classification and indicating their compliance with 1CC-ES EG107 and with the weathering requirements con≠tained in Health and Safety Code Section 13132.7 (j).
Health and Safety Code Section 13132.7 (j) No wood roof covering materials shall be sold or applied in this state unless both of the following conditions are met:
(l)The materials have been approved and listed by the State Fire Marshal as complying with the requirements of this section.
(2)The materials have passed at least five years of the 10≠year natural weathering test. The 10-year natural weathering test required by this subdivision shall be conducted in accordance with Standard 15-2 of the 1994 edition of the Uniform Building Code at a testing facility recognized by the State Fire Marshal.
R902.3 Building integrated photovoltaic systems. Rooftop installed building integrated photovoltaic systems that serve as the roof covering shall be listed and labeled for fire classifica≠tion in accordance with Sections R902.1 through R902.1.4.
R902.4 Photovoltaic panels and modules. Effective January 1, 2015, rooftop mounted photovoltaic systems shall be
II
tested, listed and identified with a fire classification in accor≠dance with UL 1703. The fire classification shall comply with Table 1505. 1 of the California Building Code based on the type of construction of the building.
SECTION R903 WEATHER PROTECTION
R903.1 General. Roof decks shall be covered with approved roof coverings secured to the building or structure in accor≠dance with the provisions of this chapter. Roof assemblies shall be designed and installed in accordance with this code and the approved manufacturer's installation instructions such that the roof assembly shall serve to protect the building or structure.
R903.2 Flashing. Flashings shall be installed in a manner that prevents moisture from entering the wall and roof through joints in copings, through moisture permeable mate≠rials and at intersections with parapet walls and other penetra≠tions through the roof plane.
R903.2.1 Locations. Flashings shall be installed at wall and roof intersections, wherever there is a change in roof slope or direction and around roof openings. A flashing shall be installed to divert the water away from where the eave of a sloped roof intersects a vertical sidewall. Where flashing is of metal, the metal shall be corrosion resistant





R903.2.2 Crickets and saddles. A cricket or saddle shall
be installed on the ridge side of any chimney or penetra≠
tion more than 30 inches (762 mm) wide as measured per≠
pendicular to the slope. Cricket or saddle coverings shall
be sheet metal or of the same material as the roof covering.

Exception: Unit skylights installed in accordance with Section R308.6 and flashed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions shall be permitted to be installed without a cricket or saddle.


R903.3 Coping. Parapet walls shall be properly coped with noncombustible, weatherproof materials of a width no less / than the thickness of the parapet wall.
R903.4 Roof drainage. Unless roofs are sloped to drain over roof edges, roof drains shall be installed at each low point of the roof.
R903.4.1 Secondary (emergency overflow) drains or scup≠
pers. Where roof drains are required, secondary emergency
overflow roof drains or scuppers shall be provided where
the roof perimeter construction extends above the roof in
such a manner that water will be entrapped if the primary
drains allow buildup for any reason. Overflow drains having
the same size as the roof drains shall be installed with the
inlet flow line located 2 inches (5 1 mm) above the low point
of the roof, or overflow scuppers having three times the size
of the roof drains and having a minimum opening height of


\

4 inches (102 mm) shall be installed in the adjacent parapet /walls with the inlet flow located 2 inches (5 1 mm) above the low point of the roof served. The installation and sizing of overflow drains, leaders and conductors shall comply with the California Plumbing Code.
SECTION R904 MATERIALS

R904.1 Scope. The requirements set forth in this section shall apply to the application of roof covering materials specified herein. Roof assemblies shall be applied in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer's installation instructions. Installation of roof assemblies shall comply with the applica≠ble provisions of Section R905.
R904.2 Compatibility of materials. Roof assemblies shall be of materials that are compatible with each other and with the building or structure to which the materials are applied.


R904.3 Material specifications and physical characteris≠tics. Roof covering materials shall conform to the applicable standards listed in this chapter. In the absence of applicable standards or where materials are of questionable suitability, testing by an approved testing agency shall be required by the building official to determine the character, quality and limi≠tations of application of the materials.


R904.4 Prodnct identification. Roof covering materials shall be delivered in packages bearing the manufacturer's identifying marks and approved testing agency labels when required. Bulk shipments of materials shall be accompanied by the same information issued in the form of a certificate or on a bill of lading by the manufacturer.




JULY 1, 2015 SUPPLEMENT 2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
BLUE

ROOF ASSEMBLIES
TABLE R905.2.4.1(2) CLASSIFICATION OF ASPHALT SHINGLES PER ASTM D 3161

MAXIMUM BASIC WIND SPEED  CLASSIFICATION  
FROM FIGURE 301 .2(4)A (mph)  REQUIREMENT  
85  A, DorF  
90  A, DorF  
100  A, DorF  
110  F  
120  F  
130  F  
140  F  
150  F  

For SI: 1 mile per hour = 0.447 rn/s.
R905.2.5 Fasteners. Fasteners for asphalt shingles shall be galvanized steel, stainless steel, aluminum or copper roofing nails, minimum 12 gage [0.105 inch (3 mm)] shank with a minimum 3/8-inch-diameter (10 mm) head, ASTM F 1667, of a length to penetrate through the roof≠ing materials and a minimum of 3/4 inch (19 mm) into the roof sheathing. Where the roof sheathing is less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) thick, the fasteners shall penetrate through the sheathing. Fasteners shall comply with ASTM F 1667.



R905.2.6 Attachment. Asphalt shingles shall have the minimum number of fasteners required by the manufac≠turer, but not less than four fasteners per strip shingle or two fasteners per individual shingle. Where the roof slope exceeds 21 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2 1: 12, 175-percent slope), shingles shall be installed as required by the manufacturer.
R905.2. 7 Underlayment application. For roof slopes from two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17-percent slope), up to four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33≠
percent slope), underlayment shall be two layers applied in the following manner. Apply a 19-inch (483 mm) strip of underlayment felt parallel to and starting at the eaves, fas≠tened sufficiently to hold in place. Starting at the eave,
∑

apply 36-inch-wide (914 mm) sheets of underlayment, overlapping successive sheets 19 inches (483 mm), and fastened sufficiently to hold in place. Distortions in the underlayment shall not interfere with the ability of the shingles to seal. For roof slopes of four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope) or greater, underlay ment shall be one layer applied in the following manner. Underlayment shall be applied shingle fashion, parallel to and starting from the eave and lapped 2 inches (5 1 mm), fastened sufficiently to hold in place. Distortions in the underlayment shall not interfere with the ability of the shingles to seal. End laps shall be offset by 6 feet (1 829
mm).

R905.2.7.1 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water as designated in Table R301.2(1), an ice bar≠rier that consists of a least two layers of underlayment cemented together or of a self-adhering polymer modi≠fied bitumen sheet, shall be used in lieu of normal underlayment and extend from the lowest edges of all


0
0
0




()

SECTION R905
REQUIREMENTS FOR ROOF COVERINGS

R905.1 Roof covering application. Roof coverings shall be applied in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section and the manufacturer's installation instructions. Unless otherwise specified in this section, roof coverings shall be installed to resist the component and cladding loads specified in Table R301.2(2), adjusted for height and expo≠sure in accordance with Table R301.2(3).
. R905.2 Asphalt shingles. The installation of asphalt shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section.
R905.2.1 Sheathing requirements. Asphalt shingles shall be fastened to solidly sheathed decks.
R905.2.2 Slope. Asphalt shingles shall be used only on roof slopes of two units vertical in 12 units horizontal
(2:12) or greater. For roof slopes from two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12) up to four units vertical in 12 units horizontal ( 4: 12), double underlayment application is required in accordance with Section R905.2.7.
R905.2.3
Undetlayment. Unless otherwise noted, required underlayment shall conform to ASTM D 226 Type I, ASTM D 4869 Type I, or ASTM D 6757.
Self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall comply with ASTM D 1970.
R905.2.4 Asphalt shingles. Asphalt shingles shall comply with ASTM D 225 or D 3462.
R905.2.4.1 Wind resistance of asphalt shingles.
Asphalt shingles shall be tested in accordance with ASTM D 7158. Asphalt shingles shall meet the classifi≠cation requirements of Table R905.2.4.1(1) for the appropriate maximum basic wind speed. Asphalt shin≠gle packaging shall bear a label to indicate compliance with ASTM D 7158 and the required classification in Table R905.2.4.1(1).
Exception: Asphalt shingles not included in the scope of ASTM D 7158 shall be tested and labeled to indicate compliance with ASTM D 3161 and the required classification in Table R905.2.4.1(2).
TABLE R905.2.4.1(1)
CLASSIFICATION OF ASPHALT
ROOF SHINGLES PER ASTM D 7158



MAXIMUM BASIC WIND SPEED  CLASSIFICATION  
FROM FIGURE 301 .2(4)A (mph)  REQUIREMENT  
85  D, GorH  
90  D, GorH  
100  GorH  
110  GorH  
120  GorH  
130  H  
140  H  
150  H  

For SI: 1 mile per hour = 0.447 rn/s.




ROOF ASSEMBLIES


roof surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that con≠tain no conditioned floor area.
R905.2.7.2 Underlayment and high winds. Underlay≠ment applied in areas subject to high winds [above 110 mph (49 m/s) in accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A] shall be applied with corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance with manufacturer's installation instruc≠tions. Fasteners are to be applied along the overlap not farther apart than 36 inches (914 mm) on center.
Underlayment installed where the basic wind speed equals or exceeds 120 mph (54 m/s) shall comply with ASTM D 226 Type II, ASTM D 4869 Type IV, or ASTM D 6757. The underlayment shall be attached in a grid pattern of 12 inches (305 mm) between side laps with a 6-inch (152 rom) spacing at the side laps. Under≠layment shall be applied in accordance with Section R905.2.7 except all laps shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) . Underlayment shall be attached using metal or plastic cap nails with a head diameter of not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) with a thickness of at least 32-gauge sheet metal. The cap-nail shank shall be a minimum of 12 gauge (0.105 inches) with a length to penetrate through the roof sheathing or a minimum oe/4 inch (19 mm) into the roof sheathing.
Exception: As an alternative, adhered underlayment complying with ASTM D 1970 shall be permitted.
R905.2.8 Flashing. Flashing for asphalt shingles shall
comply with this section.
R905.2.8.1 Base and cap flashing. Base and cap flash≠ing shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer' s installation instructions. Base flashing shall be of either corrosion-resistant metal of minimum nominal 0.019≠inch (0.5 mm) thickness or mineral surface roll roofmg weighing a minimum of 77 pounds per 100 square feet
2
( 4 kg/m). Cap flashing shall be corrosion-resistant metal of minimum nominal 0.019-inch (0.5 mm) thickness.
R905.2.8.2 Valleys. Valley linings shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instruc≠tions before applying shingles. Valley linings of the following types shall be permitted:

1.
For open valleys (valley lining exposed) lined
with metal, the valley lining shall be at least 24
inches (610 mm) wide and of any of the corro≠
sion-resistant metals in Table R905.2.8.2.


2.
For open valleys, valley lining of two plies of
mineral surfaced roll roofing, complying with
ASTM D 3909 or ASTM D 6380 Class M, shall
be permitted. The bottom layer shall be 18 inches
( 457 mm) and the top layer a minimum of 36
inches (914 mm) wide.


3.
For closed valleys (valley covered with shingles),
valley lining of one ply of smooth roll roofmg
complying with ASTM D 6380 and at least 36
inches wide (914 mm) or valley lining as
described in Item 1 or 2 above shall be permitted.
Self-adhering polymer modified bitumen under≠
layment complying with ASTM D 1970 shall be
permitted in lieu of the lining material.




R905.2.8.3 Sidewall flashing. Base flashing against a vertical sidewall shall be continuous or step flashing and shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) in height and 4 inches (102 mm) in width and shall direct water away from the vertical sidewall onto the roof and/or into the gutter. Where siding is provided on the vertical
0
sidewall, the vertical leg of the flashing shall be contin≠uous under the siding. Where anchored masonry veneer is provided on the vertical sidewall, the base flashing shall be provided in accordance with this section and counterflashing shall be provided in accordance with Section R703.7.2.2. Where exterior plaster or adhered masonry veneer is provided on the vertical sidewall, the base flashing shall be provided in accordance with this section and Section R703.6.3.


TABLE R905.2.8.2
VALLEY LINING MATERIAL

MATERIAL  MINIMUM THICKNESS (inches)  GAGE  WEIGHT (pounds)  
Cold-rolled copper  0.0216 nominal  - ASTM B 370, 16 oz. per square foot  
Lead-coated copper  0.0216 nominal  - ASTM B 101, 16 oz. per square foot  
High-yield copper  0.0162 nominal  - ASTM B 370, 12 oz. per square foot  
Lead-coated high-yield copper  0.0162 nominal  - ASTM B 101, 12 oz. per square foot  
Aluminum  0.024  - -
Stainless steel  - 28  -
Galvanized steel  0.0179  26 (zinc coated G90)  -
Zinc alloy  0.027  - -
Lead  - - 21/2  
Painted terne  - - 20  



For Sl: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

ROOF ASSEMBLIES








R905.2.8.4 Other flashing. Flashing against a vertical front wall, as well as soil stack, vent pipe and chimney flashing, shall be applied according to the asphalt shin≠gle manufacturer's printed instructions.
R905.2.8.5 Drip edge. A drip edge shall be provided at eaves and gables of shingle roofs. Adjacent pieces of drip edge shall be overlapped a minimum of 2 inches (5 1 mm). Drip edges shall extend a minimum of 0.25 inch (6.4 mm) below the roof sheathing and extend up the roof deck a minimum of 2 inches (5 1 mm) . Drip edges shall be mechanically fastened to the roof deck at a maximum of 12 inches (305 mm) o.c. with fasteners as specified in Section R905.2.5. Underlayment shall be installed over the drip edge along eaves and under the underlayment on gables. Unless specified differ≠ently by the shingle manufacturer, shingles are permit≠ted to be flush with the drip edge.
R905.3 Clay and concrete tile. The installation of clay and concrete tile shall comply with the provisions of this section.
R905.3.1 Deck requirements. Concrete and clay tile shall be installed only over solid sheathing or spaced structural sheathing boards.
R905.3.2 Deck slope. Clay and concrete roof tile shall be installed on roof slopes of two and one-half units vertical in 12 units horizontal ( 21/2:12) or greater. For roof slopes from two and one-half units vertical in 12 units horizontal (21/2:12) to four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (4:12), double underlayment application is required in accordance with Section R905.3.3.
R905.3.3 Underlayment. Unless otherwise noted, required underlayment shall conform to ASTM D 226 Type II; ASTM D 2626 Type I; or ASTM D 6380 Class M mineral surfaced roll roofing.
R905.3.3.1 Low slope roofs. For roof slopes from two and one-half units vertical in 12 units horizontal (21/2:12), up to four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (4:12), underlayment shall be a minimum of two layers under≠layment applied as follows:
1. 	
Starting at the eave, a 19-inch (483 mm) strip of underlayment shall be applied parallel with the eave and fastened sufficiently in place.

2.
Starting 	at the eave, 36-inch-wide (914 mm) strips of underlayment felt shall be applied, over≠lapping successive sheets 19 inches (483 mm), and fastened sufficiently in place.


R905.3.3.2 High slope roofs. For roof slopes of four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (4:12) or greater, underlayment shall be a minimum of one layer of underlayment felt applied shingle fashion, parallel to and starting from the eaves and lapped 2 inches (5 1 mm), fastened sufficiently in place.
R905.3.3.3 Underlayment and high winds. Underlay≠ment applied in areas subject to high wind [above 110 miles per hour (49 m/s) in accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A] shall be applied with corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance with manufacturer' s installa≠tion instructions. Fasteners are to be applied along the overlap not farther apart than 36 inches (914 mm) on center.
Underlayment installed where the basic wind speed equals or exceeds 120 mph (54 m/s) shall be attached in a grid pattern of 12 inches (305 mm) between side laps with a 6-inch (152 mm) spacing at the side laps. Under≠layment shall be applied in accordance with Section R905.2.7 except all laps shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm). Underlayment shall be attached using metal or plastic cap nails with a head diameter of not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) with a thickness of at least 32-gauge sheet metal. The cap-nail shank shall be a minimum of 12 gauge (0.105 inches) with a length to penetrate through the roof sheathing or a minimum of 3/4-inch (19 mm) into the roof sheathing.
Exception: As an alternative, adhered underlayment
complying with ASTM∑D 1970 shall be permitted. R905.3.4 Clay tile. Clay roof tile shall comply with ASTMC 1167.
R905.3.5 Concrete tile. Concrete roof tile shall comply with ASTM C 1492.
R905.3.6 Fasteners. Nails shall be corrosion resistant and not less than 11 gage, 5/6-inch (1 1 mm) head, and of suffi≠
1

cient length to penetrate the deck a minimum of 3/4 inch (19 mm) or through the thickness of the deck, whichever is less. Attaching wire for clay or concrete tile shall not be smaller than 0.083 inch (2 mm). Perimeter fastening areas include three tile courses but not less than 36 inches (914 mm) from either side of hips or ridges and edges of eaves and gable rakes.
R905.3.7 Application. Tile shall be applied in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer's installation instructions, based on the following:
1.
Climatic conditions.

2. 	
Roof slope.

3.
Underlayment system.

4.
Type of tile being installed.



Clay and concrete roof tiles shall be fastened in accor≠dance with this section and the manufacturer's installation instructions. Perimeter tiles shall be fastened with a mini≠mum of one fastener per tile. Tiles with installed weight
2

less than 9 pounds per square foot (0.4 kg/m) require a minimum of one fastener per tile regardless of roof slope. Clay and concrete roof tile attachment shall be in accor≠dance
with the manufacturer's installation instructions where applied in areas where the wind speed exceeds 100 miles per hour ( 45 m/s) and on buildings where the roof is located more than 40 feet (12 192 mm) above grade. In areas subject to snow, a minimum of two fasteners per tile is required. In all other areas, clay and concrete roof tiles shall be attached in accordance with Table R905.3.7.






ROOF ASSEMBLIES
TABLE R905.3.7 CLAY AND CONCRETE TILE ATTACHMENT
SHEATHING  ROOF SLOPE  NUMBER OF FASTENERS  
Solid without battens  All  One per tile -
Spaced or solid with battens and slope < 5: 12  Fasteners not required  
Spaced sheathing with≠ 5:12 :s; slope < 12: 12  One per tile/ every other row  
out battens  12: 12 :s; slope < 24: 12  One per tile  

R905.3.8 Flashing. At the juncture of roof vertical sur≠faces, flashing and counterflashing shall be provided in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer' s installation instructions and, where of metal, shall not be less than 0.019 inch (0.5 mm) (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage) corrosion-resistant metal. The valley flashing shall extend at least 11 inches (279 mm) from the centerline each way and have a splash diverter rib not less than 1 inch (25 mm) high at the flow line formed as part of the flashing. Sections of flashing shall have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 mm). For roof slopes of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) and greater, valley flashing shall have a 36-inch-wide (914 mm) underlayment of one layer of Type I underlayment running the full length of the valley, in addition to other required underlayment. In areas where the average daily temperature in January is 25∞F (-4∞C) or less, metal valley flashing underlayment shall be solid-cemented to the roof≠ing underlayment for slopes less than seven units vertical in 12 units horizontal (58-percent slope) or be of self≠adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet.
R905.4 Metal roof shingles. The installation of metal roof shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section.
R905.4.1 Deck requirements. Metal roof shingles shall be applied to a solid or closely fitted deck, except where the roof covering is specifically designed to be applied to spaced sheathing.
R905.4.2 Deck slope. Metal roof shingles shall not be installed on roof slopes below three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope).
R905.4.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with ASTM D 226, Type I or Type IT, ASTM D 4869, Type I or Type IT, or ASTM D 1970. Underlayment shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instal≠lation instructions.
R905.4.3.1 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water as designated in Table R301.2(1), an ice bar≠rier that consists of at least two layers of underlayment cemented together or a self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall be used in place of normal under≠layment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that con≠tain no conditioned floor area.
R905.4.3.2 Underlayment and high winds. Underlay≠ment applied in areas subject to high winds [above 110 mph (49 m/s) in accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A] shall be applied with corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance with manufacturer's installation instruc≠tions. Fasteners are to be applied along the overlap not farther apart than 36 inches (914 mm) on center.
Underlayment installed where the basic wind speed equals or exceeds 120 mph (54 m/s) shall comply with ASTM D 226 Type IT, ASTM D 4869 Type IV, or ASTM D 1970. The underlayment shall be attached in
a grid pattern of 12 inches (305 mm) between side laps with a 6-inch (152 mm) spacing at the side laps. Under≠layment shall be applied in accordance with Section R905 .2.7 except all laps shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm). Underlayment shall be attached using metal or plastic cap nails with a head diameter of not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) with a thickness of at least 32 gauge sheet metal. The cap-nail shank shall be a minimum of 12 gauge (0.105 inches) with a length to penetrate through the roof sheathing or a minimum of \ inch (19 mm) into the roof sheathing.
Exception: As an alternative, adhered underlayment complying with ASTM D 1970 shall be permitted.

R905.4.4 Material standards. Metal roof shingle roof coverings shall comply with Table R905.10.3(1). The materials used for metal roof shingle roof coverings shall be naturally corrosion resistant or be made corrosion resis≠tant in accordance with the standards and minimum thick≠nesses listed in Table R905.10.3(2).
R905.4.5 Application. Metal roof shingles shall be secured to the roof in accordance with this chapter and the approved manufacturer's installation instructions.


R905.4.6 Flashing. Roof valley flashing shall be of corro≠sion-resistant metal of the same material as the roof cover≠ing or shall comply with the standards in Table R905.10.3(1). The valley flashing shall extend at least 8 inches (203 mm) from the centerline each way and shall have a splash diverter rib not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) high at the flow line formed as part of the flashing. Sec≠tions of flashing shall have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 min). The metal valley flashing shall have a 36-inch-wide (914 mm) underlayment directly under it consisting of one layer of underlayment running the full length of the valley, in addition to underlaymentrequired for metal roof shingles. In areas where the average daily temperature in January is 25∞F (-4∞C) or less, the metal valley flashing underlayment shall be solid cemented to the roofmg underlayment for roof slopes under seven units vertical in 12 units horizontal (58-percent slope) or self≠adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet.


R905.5 Mineral-surfaced roll roofing. The installation of mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall comply with this section.
R905.5.1 Deck requirements. Mineral-surfaced roll roof≠ing shall be fastened to solidly sheathed roofs.





()


(_)



u

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


ROOF ASSEMBLIES

0
0
()

()


(_j



R905.5.2 Deck slope. Mineral-surfaced roll roofmg shall not be applied on roof slopes below one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope).
R905.5.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply
with ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869, Type I or II.
R905.5.3.1 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water as designated in Table R301.2(1), an ice bar≠rier that consists of at least two layers of underlayment cemented together or a self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall be used in place of normal under≠layment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that con≠tain no conditioned floor area.
R905.5.3.2 Underlayment and high winds. Underlay≠ment applied in areas subject to high winds [above 110 mph (49 m/s) in accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A] shall be applied with corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance with manufacturer's installation instruc≠tions. Fasteners are to be applied along the overlap not farther apart than 36 inches (914 mm) on center.
Underlayment installed where the basic wind speed equals or exceeds 120 mph (54 m/s) shall comply with ASTM D 226 Type II or ASTM D 4869 Type IV. The underlayment shall be attached in a grid pattern of 12 inches (305 mm) between side laps with a 6-inch (152 mm) spacing at the side laps. Underlayment shall be applied in accordance with Section R905.2.7 except all laps shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm). Under≠layment shall be attached using metal or plastic cap nails with a head diameter of not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) with a thickness of at least 32-gauge sheet metal. The cap-nail shank shall be a minimum of 12 gauge
(0.105 inches) with a length to penetrate through the roof sheathing or a minimum of 3/4 inch (19 mm) into the roof sheathing.
Exception: As an alternative, adhered underlay≠ment complying with ASTM D 1970 shall be per≠mitted.
R905.5.4 Material standards. Mineral-surfaced roll roof≠ing shall conform to ASTM D 3909 or ASTM D 6380, Class M.
R905.5.5 Application. Mineral-surfaced roll roofmg shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manu≠facturer's installation instructions.
R905.6 Slate and slate-type shingles. The installation of
slate and slate-type shingles shall comply with the provisions
of this section.
R905.6.1 Deck requirements. Slate shingles shall be fas≠tened to solidly sheathed roofs.
R905.6.2 Deck slope, Slate shingles shall be used only on slopes of four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-per≠cent slope) or greater.
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
R905.6.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with ASTM D 226, Type I, or ASTM D 4869, Type I or II. Underlayment shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
R905.6.3.1 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water as designated in Table R301.2(1), an ice bar≠rier that consists of at least two layers of underlayment cemented together or a self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal underlay≠ment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof sur≠faces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that con≠
tain no conditioned floor area.
R905.6.3.2 Underlayment and high winds. Underlay≠ment applied in areas subject to high winds [above 110 mph (49 m/s) in accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A] shall be applied with corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance with manufacturer's installation instruc≠tions. Fasteners are to be applied along the overlap not farther apart than 36 inches (914 mm) on center.
Underlayment installed where the basic wind speed equals or exceeds 120 mph (54 m/s) shall comply with ASTM D 226 Type II or ASTM D 4869 Type IV. The underlayment shall be attached in a grid pattern of 12 inches (305 mm) between side laps with a 6-inch (152 mm) spacing at the side laps. Underlayment shall be applied in accordance with Section R905.2.7 except all laps shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm). Under≠layment shall be attached using metal or plastic cap nails with a head diameter of not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) with a thickness of at least 32-gauge sheet metal. The cap-nail shank shall be a minimum of 12 gauge
(0.105 inches) with a length to penetrate through the roof sheathing or a minimum of 3/4 inch (19 mm) into the roof sheathing.
Exception: As an alternative, adhered underlayment complying with ASTM D 1970 shall be permitted.
R905.6.4 Material standards. Slate shingles shall com≠ply with ASTM C 406.

R905.6.5 Application. Minimum headlap for slate shin≠gles shall be in accordance with Table R905.6.5. Slate shingles shall be secured to the roof with two fasteners per slate. Slate shingles shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer's installation instruc≠tions.
TABLE R905.6.5 SLATE SHINGLE HEADLAP ROOF ASSEMBLIES







R905.6.6 Flashing. Flashing and counterflashing shall be made with sheet metal. Valley flashing shall be a mini≠mum of 15 inches (381 mm) wide. Valley and flashing metal shall be a minimum uncoated thickness of 0.0179≠inch (0.5 mm) zinc coated G90. Chimneys, stucco or brick walls shall have a minimum of two plies of felt for a cap flashing consisting of a 4-inch-wide (102 mm) strip of felt set in plastic cement and extending 1 inch (25 mm) above the first felt and a top coating of plastic cement. The felt shall extend over the base flashing 2 inches (5 1 mm).
R905.7 Wood shingles. The installation of wood shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section.
R905.7.1 Deck requirements. Wood shingles shall be installed on solid or spaced sheathing. Where spaced sheathing is used, sheathing boards shall not be less than l-inch by 4-inch (25.4 mm by 102 mm) nominal dimen≠sions and shall be spaced on centers equal to the weather exposure to coincide with the placement of fasteners.
R905.7.1.1 Solid sheathing required. In areas where the average daily temperature in January is 25∞F ( -4 ∞C) or less, solid sheathing is required on that portion of the roof requiring the application of an ice barrier.
R905.7.2 Deck slope. Wood shingles shall be installed on slopes of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-per≠cent slope) or greater.
R905.7.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869, Type I or II.
R905.7.3.1 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup
of water as designated in Table R301.2(1), an ice bar≠rier that consists of at least two layers of underlayment cemented together or a self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall be used in lieu of normal underlay≠ment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof sur≠faces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that con≠tain no conditioned floor area.
R905.7.3.2 Underlayment and high winds. Underlay≠ment applied in areas subject to high winds [above 110 mph (49 m/s) in accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A] shall be applied with corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance with manufacturer's installation instruc≠tions. Fasteners are to be applied along the overlap not farther apart than 36 inches (914mm) on center.
Underlayment installed where the basic wind speed equals or exceeds 120 mph (54 m/s) shall comply with ASTM D 226 Type II or ASTM D 4869 Type IV. The underlayment shall be attached in a grid pattern of 12 inches (305 mm) between side laps with a 6-inch (152 rom) spacing at the side laps. Underlayment shall be applied in accordance with Section R905.2.7 except all Head laps shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm). Underlayment shall be attached using metal or plastic cap nails with a head diameter of not less than 1 inch
(25.4 mm) with a thickness of at least 32-gauge sheet metal. The cap-nail shank shall be a minimum of 12 gauge (0.105 inches) with a length to penetrate through the roof sheathing or a minimum of 3/4 inch (19 rom) into the roof sheathing.





Exception: As an alternative, adhered underlayment complying with ASTM D 1970 shall be permitted.

R905.7.4 Material standards. Wood shingles shall be of naturally durable wood and comply with the requirements of Table R905.7.4.
TABLE R905.7.4 WOOD SHINGLE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS


R905.7.5 Application. Wood shingles shall be installed according to this chapter and the manufacturer's installa≠tion instructions. Wood shingles shall be laid with a side lap not less than 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) between joints in courses, and no two joints in any three adjacent courses shall be in direct alignment. Spacing between shingles shall not be less than 1/4 inch to \ inch (6 mm to 10 rom). Weather exposure for wood shingles shall not exceed those set in Table R905.7.5. Fasteners for wood shingles shall be corrosion resistant with a minimum penetration of 1/2 inch (13 rom) into the sheathing. For sheathing less than 1/2 inch (13 mm) in thickness, the fasteners shall extend through the sheathing. Wood shingles shall be attached to the roof with two fasteners per shingle, positioned no more than 3/4 inch (19 mm) from each edge and no more than 1 inch (25 mm) above the exposure line.
TABLE R905.7.5 WOOD SHINGLE WEATHER EXPOSURE AND ROOF SLOPE

ROOFING MATERIAL  LENGTH (inches)  GRADE  
No. 1  
16  No. 2  
No. 3  
Shingles of  No. 1  
naturally durable  18  No. 2  
wood  No. 3  
No. 1  
24  No. 2  
No. 3  
For SI: I inch = 25.4 mm.  

R905.7.6 Valley flashing. Roof flashing shall be not less than No. 26 gage [0.019 inches (0.5 rom)] corrosion-resis≠tant sheet metal and shall extend 10 inches (254 mm) from the centerline each way for roofs having slopes less than 12 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (100-percent slope), and 7 inches (178 rom) from the centerline each way for slopes of 12 units vertical in 12 units horizontal and
EXPOSURE (inches)
3:12 pitch to 4:12 pitch or
<4:12 steeper
33/4 5 3 1/2 4 3 31/2 41/4 51/2 4
4'/z 31/2 4 53/4 ?'lz 51/2 61/2
5 51/2
C)

0

()


2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

0
0
0

0

0

greater. Sections of flashing shall have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 mm).
R905.7.7 Label required. Each bundle of shingles shall be identified by a label of an approved grading or inspec≠tion bureau or agency.
R905.8 Wood shakes. The installation of wood shakes shall comply with the provisions of this section.
R905.8.1 Deck requirements. Wood shakes shall be used only on solid or spaced sheathing. Where spaced sheathing is used, sheathing boards shall not be less than l-inch by 4-inch (25 mm by 102 mm) nominal dimensions and shall be spaced on centers equal to the weather exposure to coincide with the placement of fasteners. Where l-inch by 4-inch (25 mm by 102 mm) spaced sheathing is installed at 10 inches (254 mm) on center, additional l-inch by 4≠inch (25 mm by 102 mm) boards shall be installed between the sheathing boards.
R905.8.1.1 Solid sheathing required. In areas where the average daily temperature in January is 25∞F (-4∞C) or less, solid sheathing is required on that portion of the roof requiring an ice barrier.
R905.8.2 Deck slope. Wood shakes shall only be used on slopes of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-per≠cent slope) or greater.
R905.8.3 Underlayment. Underlayment shall comply with ASTM D 226, Type I or ASTM D 4869, Type I or IT.
R905.8.3.1 Ice barrier. In areas where there has been a history of ice forming along the eaves causing a backup of water as designated in Table R301.2(1), an ice bar≠rier that consists of at least two layers of underlayment cemented together or a self-adhering polymer modified bitumen sheet shall be used in place of normal under≠layment and extend from the lowest edges of all roof surfaces to a point at least 24 inches (610 mm) inside the exterior wall line of the building.
Exception: Detached accessory structures that con≠tain no conditioned floor area.
R905.8.3.2 Underlayment and high winds. Underlay≠ment applied in areas subject to high winds [above 110 mph (49 m/s) in accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A] shall be applied with corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance with manufacturer's installation instruc≠tions. Fasteners are to be applied along the overlap not farther apart than 36 inches (914 mm) on center.
ROOF ASSEMBLIES
Underlayment installed where the basic wind speed equals or exceeds 120 mph (54 m/s) shall comply with ASTM D 226 Type IT or ASTM D 4869 Type IV. The underlayment shall be attached in a grid pattern of 12 inches (305 mm) between side laps with a 6-inch (152 mm) spacing at the side laps. Underlayment shall be applied in accordance with Section R905.2.7 except all laps shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm). Under≠layment shall be attached using metal or plastic cap nails with a head diameter of not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) with a thickness of at least 32-gauge sheet metal. The cap-nail shank shall be a minimum of 12 gauge
(0. 105 inches) with a length to penetrate through the roof sheathing or a minimum of 314 inch (19 mm) into the roof sheathing.
Exception: As an alternative, adhered underlayment
complying with ASTM D 1970 shall be permitted.

R905.8.4 Interlayment. Interlayment shall comply with
ASTM D 226, Type I.

R905.8.5 Material standards. Wood shakes shall comply with the requirements of Table R905.8.5.
R905.8.6 Application. Wood shakes shall be installed according to this chapter and the manufacturer's installa≠tion instructions. Wood shakes shall be laid with a side lap not less than 1 112 inches (38 mm) between joints in adja≠cent courses. Spacing between shakes in the same course shall be 3ls inch to sis inch (9.5 mm to 15.9 mm) for shakes and tapersawn shakes of naturally durable wood and shall be 3ls inch to sis inch (9.5 mm to 15.9 mm) for preserva≠tive-treated taper sawn shakes. Weather exposure for wood shakes shall not exceed those set forth in Table R905.8.6. Fasteners for wood shakes shall be corrosion≠resistant, with a minimum penetration of 112 inch (12.7 mm) into the sheathing. For sheathing less than 112 inch
(12.7 mm) thick, the fasteners shall extend through the sheathing. Wood shakes shall be attached to the roof with two fasteners per shake, positioned no more than 1 inch (25 mm) from each edge and no more than 2 inches (5 1 mm) above the exposure line.
R905.8.7 Shake placement. The starter course at the eaves shall be doubled and the bottom layer shall be either 15-inch (381 mm), 18-inch (457 mm) or 24-inch (610 mm) wood shakes or wood shingles. Fifteen-inch (381 mm) or 18-inch (457 mm) wood shakes may be used for the fmal course at the ridge. Shakes shall be interlaid with 18-inch-wide (457 mm) strips of not less than No. 30 felt shingled between each course in such a manner that no felt
TABLE R905.8.5
WOOD SHAKE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS

MATERIAL
Wood shakes of naturally durable wood Taper sawn shakes of naturally durable wood Preservative-treated shakes and shingles of naturally durable wood Fire-retardant-treated shakes and shingles of naturally durable wood Preservative-treated taper sawn shakes of Southern pine treated in accordance with
A WPA Standard Ul (Commodity Specification A, Use Category 3B and Section 5.6)
MINIMUM APPLICABLE GRADES GRADING RULES
1 Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau 1 or 2 Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau 1 Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau 1 Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau Forest Products Laboratory of the
lor2
Texas Forest Services



ROOF ASSEMBLIES

is exposed to the weather by positioning the lower edge of each felt strip above the butt end of the shake it covers a distance equal to twice the weather exposure.
TABLE R905.8.6 WOOD SHAKE WEATHER EXPOSURE AND ROOF SLOPE
ROOFING MATERIAL  LENGTH (inches)  GRADE  EXPOSURE (inches) 4:12 pitch or steeper  
Shakes of naturally  18  No. 1  71/2  
durable wood  24  No. 1  10.  
Preservative-treated taper sawn shakes of Southern Yell ow Pine  18  No. 1  71/2  
24 18  No. 1 No. 2  10 5\  
24  No. 2  71/2  
18  No. 1  71/2  
Taper-sawn shakes of  24  No. 1  10  
naturally durable wood  18  No. 2  51/2  
24  No. 2  71/2  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
a. For 24-inch by 3/8-inch handsplit shakes, the maximum exposure is 71/2 inches.
R905.8.8 Valley flashing. Roof valley flashing shall not
be less than No. 26 gage [0.019 inch (0.5 mm)] corrosion≠
resistant sheet metal and shall extend at least 11 inches (279 mm) from the centerline each way. Sections of flash≠ing shall have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (1 02
mm).
R905.8.9 Label required. Each bundle of shakes shall be identified by a label of an approved grading or inspection bureau or agency. R905.9 Built-up roofs. The installation of built-up roofs shall comply with the provisions of this section.
R905.9.1 Slope. Built-up roofs shall have a design slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units hori≠


zontal (2-percent slope) for drainage, except for coal-tar built-up roofs, which shall have a design slope of a mini≠mum one-eighth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1-per≠cent slope).
()R905.9.2 Material standards. Built-up roof covering materials shall comply with the standards in Table R905.9.2 or UL 55A.
R905.9.3 Application. Built-up roofs shall be installed
according to this chapter and the manufacturer's installa≠
tion instructions.

R905.10 Metal roof panels. The installation of metal roof panels shall comply with the provisions of this section.
R905.10.1 Deck requirements. Metal roof panel roof
coverings shall be applied to solid or spaced sheathing,
except where the roof covering is specifically designed to
be applied to spaced supports.

0

TABLE R905.9.2
BUILT-UP ROOFING MATERIAL STANDARDS



MATERIAL STANDARD  STANDARD  
Acrylic coatings used in roofing  ASTM D6083  
Aggregate surfacing .  ASTM D 1863  
Asphalt adhesive used in roofing  ASTM D 3747  
Asphalt cements used in roofing  ASTM D 2822; D 3019; D 4586  
Asphalt-coated glass fiber base sheet  ASTM D 4601  
Asphalt coatings used in roofmg  ASTM D 1227; D 2823; D 2824; D 4479  
Asphalt glass felt  ASTM D2178  
Asphalt primer used in roofing  ASTM D 41  
Asphalt-saturated and asphalt-coated organic felt base sheet  ASTM D2626  
Asphalt-saturated organic felt (perforated)  ASTM D226  
Asphalt used in roofing  ASTM D312  
Coal-tar cements used in roofing  ASTM D 4022; D 5643  
Coal-tar primer used in roofing, dampproofing and waterproofing  ASTM D 43  
Coal-tar saturated organic felt  ASTM D227  
Coal-tar used in roofing  ASTM D 450, Type I or 11  
Glass mat, coal tar  ASTM D 4990  
Glass mat, venting type  ASTM D 4897  
Mineral-surfaced inorganic cap sheet  ASTM D 3909  
Thermoplastic fabrics used in roofing  ASTM D 5665; D 5726  

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

ROOF ASSEMBLIES

R905.10.2 Slope. Minimum slopes for metal roof panels () shall comply with the following:
1. The minimum slope for lapped, nonsoldered-seam metal roofs without applied lap sealant shall be three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope).
CJ

2. The minimum slope for lapped, nonsoldered-seam metal roofs with applied lap sealant shall be one≠half vertical unit in 12 units horizontal (4-percent slope). Lap sealants shall be applied in accordance with the approved manufacturer's installation instructions.

3. The minimum slope for standing-seam roof systems
shall be one-quarter unit vertical in 12 units horizon≠tal (2-percent slope).
R905.10.3 Material standards. Metal-sheet roof cover≠ing systems that incorporate supporting structural mem≠bers shall be designed in accordance with the California Building Code. Metal-sheet roof coverings installed over structural decking shall comply with Table R905.10.3(1). The materials used for metal-sheet roof coverings shall be naturally corrosion resistant or provided with corrosion resistance in accordance with the standards and minimum thicknesses shown in Table R905.10.3(2).

R905.10.4 Attachment. Metal roof panels shall be secured to the supports in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer' s installation instructions. In the absence of manufacturer's installation instructions, the following fasteners shall be used:
1.
Galvanized fasteners shall be used for steel roofs.

2.
Copper, brass, bronze, copper alloy and 300-series stainless steel fasteners shall be used for copper roofs.

3. 	
Stainless steel fasteners are acceptable for metal roofs.




TABLE R905.1 0.3(2)
MINIMUM CORROSION RESISTANCE

55% aluminum-zinc alloy coated steel
ASTM A 792 AZ 50
ASTM A 875 GF60
5% aluminum alloy-coated steel
ASTM A 463 T2 65
Aluminum-coated steel
Galvanized steel
ASTM A 653 G-90
Prepainted steel
ASTM A 755"

a. 	Paint systems in accordance with ASTM A 755 shall be applied over steel products with corrosion-resistant coatings complying with ASTM A 792, ASTM A 875, ASTM A 463, or ASTM A 653.


R905.10.5 Underlayment. Underlayment shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installa≠
tion instructions.

R905.10.5.1 Underlayment and high winds. Under≠layment applied in areas subject to high winds [above 110 mph (49 rnls) in accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A] shall be applied with corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance with manufacturer's installation instructions. Fasteners are to be applied along the over≠lap not farther apart than 36 inches (914 mm) on center.
Underlayment installed where the basic wind speed equals or exceeds 120 mph (54 rnls) shall comply with ASTM D 226 Type ll. The underlayment shall be attached in a grid pattern of 12 inches (305 mm) between side laps with a 6-inch (152 mm) spacing at the side laps. Underlayment shall be applied in accor≠dance with Section R905.2.7 except all laps shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm). Underlayment shall be attached using metal or plastic cap nails with a head diameter of not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) with a thickness of at least 32-gauge sheet metal. The cap-nail shank shall be a minimum of 12 gauge (0. 105 inches) with a length to penetrate through the roof sheathing or a minimum of 3/4 inch (19 mm) into the roof sheathing.


Exception: As an alternative, adhered underlayment complying with ASTM D 1970 shall be permitted.



TABLE R905.1 0.3(1)
METAL ROOF COVERING STANDARDS


ROOF COVERING TYPE Galvanized steel Stainless steel Steel Lead-coated copper Cold-rolled copper  STANDARD APPLICATION RATEITHICKNESS ASTM A 653 G90 Zinc coated ASTM A 240, 300 Series alloys ASTM A924 ASTM B 101 ASTM B 370 minimum 16 oz/sq ft and 12 oz/sq ft high-yield copper for metal-sheet roof-covering systems; 12 oz/sq ft for preformed metal shingle systems.  
Hard lead  2 lb/sq ft  
Soft lead  3 lb/sq ft  
Aluminum  ASTM B 209, 0.024 minimum thickness for roll-formed panels and 0.019-inch minimum thickness for pressformed shingles.  
Teme (tin) and teme-coated stainless  Teme coating of 40 lb per double base box, field painted where applicable in accordance with manufacturer's installation instructions.  
Zinc  0.027 inch minimum thickness: 99.995% electrolytic high-grade zinc with alloy additives of copper (0.08 -0.20%), titanium (0.07% -0.12%) and aluminum (0.015%).  

For SI: 1 ounce per square foot = 0.305 kg/m2, 1 pound per square foot = 4.214 kg/m2, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.

ROOF ASSEMBLIES

R905.11 Modified bitumen roofing. The installation of modified bitumen roofing shall comply with the provisions of this section.
R905.11.1 Slope. Modified bitumen membrane roofs shall have a design slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit verti≠cal in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage.
R905.11.2 Material standards. Modified bitumen roof coverings shall comply with the standards in Table R905. 11.2.
TABLE R905.11.2
MODIFIED BITUMEN ROOFING MATERIAL STANDARDS

MATERIAL  STANDARD  
Acrylic coating  ASTM D6083  
Asphalt adhesive  ASTM D3747  
Asphalt cement  ASTM D 3019  
Asphalt coating  ASTM D 1227; D 2824  
Asphalt primer  ASTM D41  
Modified bitumen roof membrane  ASTM D 6162; D 6163; D 6164; D 6222; D 6223; D 6298; CGSB 37-GP-56M  

R905.11.3 Application. Modified bitumen roofs shall be installed according to this chapter and the manufacturer's installation instructions.
R905.12 Thermoset single-ply roofing. The installation of
thermoset single-ply roofing shall comply with the provisions
of this section.
R905.12.1 Slope. Thermoset single-ply membrane roofs shall have a design slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drain≠age.
R905.12.2 Material standards. Thermoset single-ply roof coverings shall comply with ASTM D 4637, ASTM D 5019 or CGSB 37-GP-52M.
R905.12.3 Application. Thermoset single-ply roofs shall be installed according to this chapter and the manufac≠turer's installation instructions.
R905.13 Thermoplastic single-ply roofing. The installation of thermoplastic single-ply roofing shall comply with the pro≠visions of this section.
R905.13.1 Slope. Thermoplastic single-ply membrane roofs shall have a design slope of a minimum of one≠fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope).
R905.13.2 Material standards. Thermoplastic single-ply roof coverings shall comply with ASTM D 4434, ASTM D 6754, ASTM D 6878 or CGSB CAN/CGSB 37.54.
R905.13.3 Application. Thermoplastic single-ply roofs shall be installed according to this chapter and the manu≠facturer's installation instructions.
R905.14 Sprayed polyurethane foam roofing. The installa≠tion of sprayed polyurethane foam roofing shall comply with the provisions of this section.
R905.14.1 Slope. Sprayed polyurethane foam roofs shall have a design slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit verti≠cal in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage.
R905.14.2 Material standards. Spray-applied polyure≠thane foam insulation shall comply with ASTM C 1029, Type ill or IV.


R905.14.3 Application. Foamed-in-place roof insulation shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer's installation instructions. A liquid-applied protective coating that complies with Table R905.14.3 shall be applied no less than 2 hours nor more than 72 hours following the application of the foam.
TABLE R905.14.3
PROTECTIVE COATING MATERIAL STANDARDS




MATERIAL  STANDARD  
Acrylic coating  ASTM D 6083  
Silicone coating  ASTM D 6694  
Moisture-cured polyurethane coating  ASTM D 6947  



R905.14.4 Foam plastics. Foam plastic materials and installation shall comply with Section R316.
R905.15 Liquid-applied roofing. The installation of liquid≠
applied roofing shall comply with the provisions of this sec≠
tion.
R905.15.1 Slope. Liquid-applied roofing shall have a
design slope of a minimum of one-fourth unit vertical in
12 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

R905.15.2 Material standards. Liquid-applied roofing
shall comply with ASTM C 836, C 957, D 1227, D 3468,
D 6083, D 6694 or D 6947.

()

R905.15.3 Application. Liquid-applied roofing shall be
installed according to this chapter and the manufacturer' s
installation instructions.

R905.16 Photovoltaic modules/shingles. The installation of photovoltaic modules/shingles shall comply with the provi≠sions of this section.
R905.16.1 Material standards. Photovoltaic modules/
shingles shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL
1703.

R905.16.2 Attachment. Photovoltaic modules/shingles
shall be attached in accordance with the manufacturer's
installation instructions.

R905.16.3 Wind resistance. Photovoltaic modules/shin≠
gles shall be tested in accordance with procedures and
acceptance criteria in ASTM D 3161. Photovoltaic mod≠
ules/shingles shall comply with the classification require≠
ments of Table R905.2.4.1(2) for the appropriate
maximum basic wind speed. Photovoltaic modules/shingle
packaging shall bear a label to indicate compliance with
the procedures in ASTM D 3161 and the required classifi≠
cation from Table R905.2.4.1(2).





SECTION R906
ROOF INSULATION


R906.1 General. The use of above-deck thermal insulation shall be permitted provided such insulation is covered with an approved roof covering and complies with FM 4450 or UL 1256.



2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



R906.2 Material standards. Above-deck thermal insulation board shall comply with the standards in Table R906.2.
TABLE R906.2
MATERIAL STANDARDS FOR ROOF INSULATION

Cellular glass board  ASTM C552  
Composite boards  ASTM C 1289, Type ill, IV, V or VI  
Expanded polystyrene  ASTM C578  
Extruded polystyrene board  ASTM C578  
Perlite board  ASTM C728  
Polyisocyanurate board  ASTM C 1289, Type I or II  
Wood fiberboard  ASTM C208  


()
SECTION R907 REROOFING
R907 .1 General. Materials and methods of application used
for re-covering or replacing an existing roof covering shall
comply with the requirements of Chapter 9.
Exception: Reroofing shall not be required to meet the
design slope requirement of one-quarter unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) in Section R905 for roofs that provide positive roof drainage.

R907 .2 Structural and construction loads. The structural roof components shall be capable of supporting the roof covering system and the material and equipment loads that will be encountered during installation of the roof covering system.
R907.3 Recovering versus replacement. New roof cover≠ings shall not be installed without first removing all existing layers of roof coverings where any of the following condi≠tions exist:
1. Where the existing roof 	or roof covering is water≠soaked or has deteriorated to the point that the existing roof or roof covering is not adequate as a base for addi≠tional roofing.

2. Where the existing roof covering is wood shake, slate, clay, cement or asbestos-cement tile.
3. 	Where the existing roof has two or more applications of any type of roof covering.
Exceptions:
1.
Complete and separate roofing 	systems, such as standing-seam metal roof systems, that are designed to transmit the roof loads directly to the building's structural system and that do not rely on existing roofs and roof coverings for support, shall not require the removal of existing roof coverings.

2.
Installation of metal panel, metal shingle and con≠crete and clay tile roof coverings over existing wood


ROOF ASSEMBLIES
shake roofs shall be permitted when the application is in accordance with Section R907 .4.
3. 	
The application of new protective coating over existing spray polyurethane foam roofing systems shall be permitted without tear-off of existing roof coverings.

4. 	
Where the existing roof assembly includes an ice barrier membrane that is adhered to the roof deck, the existing ice barrier membrane shall be permitted to remain in place and covered with an additional layer of ice barrier membrane in accordance with Section R905.


R907 .4 Roof recovering. Where the application of a new roof covering over wood shingle or shake roofs creates a combustible concealed space, the entire existing surface shall be covered with gypsum board, mineral fiber, glass fiber or other approved materials securely fastened in place.
R907.5 Reinstallation of materials. Existing slate, clay or cement tile shall be permitted for reinstallation, except that damaged, cracked or broken slate or tile shall not be rein≠stalled. Any existing flashings, edgings, outlets, vents or sim≠ilar devices that are a part of the assembly shall be replaced when rusted, damaged or deteriorated. Aggregate surfacing materials shall not be reinstalled.
R907 .6 Flashings. Flashings shall be reconstructed in accor≠dance with approved manufacturer's installation instructions. Metal flashing to which bituminous materials are to be adhered shall be primed prior to installation.
SECTION R908
SOLAR PHOTOVOL TAIC PANELS/MODULES


R908.1 Photovoltaic systems. Rooftop mounted photovoltaic shall be designed in accordance with this section.
R908.1.2 (IBC/CBC 1509.7.1 Not an SFM provision. Reserved for other agencies)
R908.1.3 Fire classification. Rooftop mounted photovol≠taic panels and modules shall have the fire classification as required by Section R902.4.
R908.1.4 Installation. Rooftop mounted photovoltaic sys≠tems shall be installed in accordance with the manufac≠turer's installation instructions.
R908.1.5 Photovoltaic panels and modules. Photovoltaic panels and modules mounted on top of a roof shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1703 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instal≠lation instructions.
R908.1.6 Fire safety provisions for photovoltaic panels/ modules. Solar photovoltaic panels/modules installed upon a roof or as an integral part of a roof assembly shall comply with the requirements of this code (see Section R331) and the California Fire Code.















2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


