---
chapter: Chapter 10
title: CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES
---

CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE -MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE CHAPTER 10-CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.)



(J

SECTION R1001 MASONRY FIREPLACES

RlOOl.l General. Masonry fireplaces shall be constructed in accordance with this section and the applicable provisions of Chapters 3 and 4.
R1001.2 Footings and foundations. Footings for masonry fireplaces and their chimneys shall be constructed of concrete or solid masonry at least 12 inches (305 mm) thick and shall extend at least 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the face of the fire≠place or foundation wall on all sides. Footings shall be founded on natural, undisturbed earth or engineered fill below frost depth. In areas not subjected to freezing, footings shall be at least 12 inches (305 mm) below finished grade.
R1001.2.1 Ash dump cleanout. Cleanout openings located within foundation walls below fireboxes, when provided, shall be equipped with ferrous metal or masonry doors and frames constructed to remain tightly closed
except when in use. Cleanouts shall be accessible and located so that ash removal will not create a hazard to combustible materials.


R1001.3 Seismic reinforcing. Masonry or concrete chim≠neys in all structures regulated by this code assigned to Seis≠mic Design Category C, D0, D1 or D2 shall be reinforced. Reinforcing shall conform to the requirements set forth in Table RlOOl.l and Section R609, Grouted Masonry.
R1001.3.1 Vertical reinforcing. For chimneys up to 40 inches (1016 mm) wide, four No. 4 continuous vertical bars shall be placed between wythes of solid masonry or within the cells of hollow unit masonry and grouted in
"'-------accordance with Section R609. Grout shall be prevented from bonding with the flue liner so that the flue liner is free to move with thermal expansion. For chimneys more
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE





than 40 inches (1016 mm) wide, two additional No. 4 ver≠tical bars shall be provided for each additional flue incor≠porated into the chimney or for each additional 40 inches (1016 mm) in width or fraction thereof.
R1001.3.2 Horizontal reinforcing. Vertical reinforce≠ment shall be placed within 1/4-inch (6 mm) ties, or other reinforcing of equivalent net cross-sectional area, placed in the bed joints according to Section R607 at a minimum of every 18 inches (457 mm) of vertical height. Two such ties shall be installed at each bend in the vertical bars.
R1001.4 Seismic anchorage. Masonry or concrete chimneys in all structures regulated by this code assigned to Seismic
II

Design Category C, D0, D1 or D2 shall be anchored at each floor, ceiling or roof line more than 6 feet (1 829 mm) above grade, except where constructed completely within the exte≠rior walls. Anchorage shall conform to the requirements of Section R1001.4.1.
R1001.4.1 Anchorage. Two 3/16-inch by l-inch (5 mm by 25 mm) straps shall be embedded a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) into the chimney. Straps shall be hooked around the outer bars and extend 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the bend. Each strap shall be fastened to a minimum of four floor ceiling or floor joists or rafters with two 1/2-inch (13 mm) bolts.
R1001.5 Firebox walls. Masonry fireboxes shall be con≠structed of solid masonry units, hollow masonry units grouted solid, stone or concrete. When a lining of firebrick at least 2 inches (5 1 mm) thick or other approved lining is provided, the minimum thickness of back and side walls shall each be 8 inches (203 mm) of solid masonry, including the lining. The width of joints between firebricks shall not be greater than 1/4 inch (6 mm). When no lining is provided, the total minimum
503 CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES








TABLE R1001.1
SUMMARY OF REQUIREMENTS FOR MASONRY FIREPLACES AND CHIMNEYS

ITEM Hearth slab thickness Hearth extension (each side of opening) Hearth extension (front of opening) Hearth slab reinforcing  LETTER" A B c D  REQUIREMENTS 4" 8" fireplace opening < 6 square foot. 12" fireplace opening ;:: 6 square foot. 16" fireplace opening < 6 square foot. 20" frreplace opening ;:: 6 square foot. Reinforced to carry its own weight and all imposed loads.  
Thickness of wall of firebox Distance from top of opening to throat  E F  10" solid brick or 8" where a frrebrick lining is used. Joints in firebrick 1/;'maximum. 8"  
Smoke chamber wall thickness Unlined walls  G  6" 8"  
Chimney Vertical reinforcingb  H  Four No. 4 full-length bars for chimney up to 40" wide. Add two No. 4 bars for each additional 40" or fraction of width or each additional flue.  
Horizontal reinforcing  J  1/;' ties at 18" and two ties at each bend in vertical steel.  
Bond beams  K  No specified requirements.  
Fireplace lintel  L  Noncombustible material.  
Chimney walls with flue lining  M  Solid masonry units or hollow masonry units grouted solid with at least 4-inch nominal thickness.  
Distances between adjacent flues  See Section R1003.13.  
Effective flue area (based on area of fireplace opening)  p  See Section R1003. 15.  
Clearances Combustible material Mantel and trim Above roof  R  See Sections R1001.11 and R1003.18. See Section R1001.1 1, Exception 4. 3' at roofline and 2' at 10'.  
Anchorageb Strap Number Embedment into chimney Fasten to Bolts  s  3Jit X 1" Two 12" hooked around outer bar with 6" extension. 4 joists Two 1/z " diameter.  
Footing Thickness Width  T  12" min. 6" each side of fireplace wall.  

()


For SI: 1 mch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2ï
Note: This table provides a summary of major requirements for the construction of masonry chimneys and fireplaces. Letter references are to Figure Rl001.1, which shows examples of typical construction. This table does not cover all requirements, nor does it cover all aspects of the indicated requirements. For the actual mandatory requirements of the code, see the indicated section of text.
a.
The letters refer to Figure R 1001.1.

b.
Not required in Seismic Design Category A orB.


thickness of back and side walls shall be 10 inches (254 mm) of solid masonry. Firebrick shall conform to ASTM C 27 or C 1261 and shall be laid with medium duty refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C 199.
Rl001.5.1 Steel fireplace units. Installation of steel frre≠place units with solid masonry to form a masonry frreplace is permitted when installed either according to the require≠ments of their listing or according to the requirements of this section. Steel fireplace units incorporating a steel frre≠box lining, shall be constructed with steel not less than 1/4 inch (6 mm) thick, and an air-circulating chamber which is ducted to the interior of the building. The firebox lining shall be encased with solid masonry to provide a total thick≠ness at the back and sides of not less than 8 inches (203 mm), of which not less than 4 inches (102 mm) shall be of solid masonry or concrete. Circulating air ducts used with steel frreplace units shall be constructed of metal or masonry.
R1001.6 Firebox dimensions. The firebox of a concrete or masonry fireplace shall have a minimum depth of 20 inches (508 mm). The throat shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm) above the fireplace opening. The throat opening shall not be less than 4 inches (102 mm) deep. The cross-sectional area of the passageway above the firebox, including the throat, damper and smoke chamber, shall not be less than the cross-sectional area of the flue.
Exception: Rumford fireplaces shall be permitted pro≠vided that the depth of the fireplace is at least 12 inches (305 mm) and at least one-third of the width of the fire≠place opening, that the throat is at least 12 inches (305 mm) above the lintel and is at least 1/20 the cross-sectional area of the frreplace opening.
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES
@ SON
CAP
0
0
WIDTH OF FIREPLACE OPENING
PlAN VIEW
2FT MIN.

HORIZONTAL REINFOAC!NG TIES
()

ÆWALLPARGETHICKNESSWITH

VERTICAL
REINFORCING
Æ FlRESOX WAI.L
THICKNESS

BRICK FIREBOX AND CHIMNEY≠SECTIONAL SIDE VIEW ON WOOD FLOOR
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 nnn, 1 foot = 304.8 nnn.
41N. MASONRY UNITS
HEARTH
EXTENSION
eARS IN OONORETE
FOOTING
BRICK FIREBOX AND BLOCK CHIMNEY≠
SECTIONAL SIDE VIEW ON CONCRETE SLAB


FIGURE R1001.1
FIREPLACE AND CHIMNEY DETAILS

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES

Rl001.7 Lintel and throat. Masonry over a frreplace open≠ing shall be supported by a lintel of noncombustible material. The minimum required bearing length on each end of the fire≠place opening shall be 4 inches (102 mm). The frreplace throat or damper shall be located a minimum of 8 inches (203 mm) above the lintel.
R1001.7.1 Damper. Masonry frreplaces shall be equipped with a ferrous metal damper located at least 8 inches (203mm) above the top of the frreplace opening. Dampers shall
be installed in the fireplace or the chimney venting the fireplace, and shall be operable from the room containing the fireplace.
Rl001.8 Smoke chamber. Smoke chamber walls shall be constructed of solid masonry units, hollow masonry units grouted solid, stone or concrete. The total minimum thickness of front, back and side walls shall be 8 inches (203 mm) of solid masonry. The inside surface shall be parged smooth with refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C 199. When a lining of firebrick at least 2 inches (51 mm) thick, or a lining of vitrified clay at least 5/8 inch (16 mm) thick, is provided, the total minimum thickness of front, back and side walls shall be 6 inches (152 mm) of solid masonry, including the lining. Firebrick shall conform to ASTM C 1261 and shall be laid with medium duty refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C 199. Vitrified clay linings shall conform to ASTM c 315.
R1001.8.1 Smoke chamber dimensions. The inside height of the smoke chamber from the fireplace throat to the beginning of the flue shall not be greater than the inside width of the fireplace opening. The inside surface of the smoke chamber shall not be inclined more than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from vertical when prefabricated smoke chamber linings are used or when the smoke chamber walls are rolled or sloped rather than corbeled. When the inside surface of the smoke chamber is formed by corbeled masonry, the walls shall not be corbeled more than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from vertical.
R1001.9 Hearth and hearth extension. Masonry fireplace hearths and hearth extensions shall be constructed of concrete or masonry, supported by noncombustible materials, and





For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
reinforced to carry their own weight and all imposed loads. No combustible material shall remain against the underside
of hearths and hearth extensions after construction.
Rl001.9.1 Hearth thickness. The minimum thickness of


fireplace hearths shall be 4 inches (102 mm).
Rl001.9.2 Hearth extension thickness. The minimum
thickness of hearth extensions shall be 2 inches (51 mm).

0

Exception: When the bottom of the firebox opening is raised at least 8 inches (203 mm) above the top of the hearth extension, a hearth extension of not less than 3/8≠inch-thick (10 mm) brick, concrete, stone, tile or other
approved noncombustible material is permitted. RlOOl.lO Hearth extension dimensions. Hearth extensions shall extend at least 16 inches (406 mm) in front of and at least 8 inches (203 mm) beyond each side of the fireplace opening. Where the frreplace opening is 6 square feet (0.6 m2) or larger, the hearth extension shall extend at least
20 inches (508 mm) in front of and at least 12 inches (305 mm) beyond each side of the fireplace opening.


RlOOl.ll Fireplace clearance. All wood beams, joists, studs and other combustible material shall have a clearance of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) from the front faces and sides of masonry frreplaces and not less than 4 inches (1 02 mm) from the back faces of masonry fireplaces. The air space shall not be filled, except to provide frre blocking in accordance with Section R1001. 12.
Exceptions:
0
1. 	
Masonry frreplaces listed and labeled for use in contact with combustibles in accordance with UL 127 and installed in accordance with the manufac≠turer's installation instructions are permitted to have combustible material in contact with their exte≠rior surfaces.

2. 	
When masonry fireplaces are part of masonry or concrete walls, combustible materials shall not be in contact with the masonry or concrete walls less than 12 inches (306 mm) from the inside surface of the nearest firebox lining.


()
FRAME WALL




FIGURE R1001.11
CLEARANCE FROM COMBUSTIBLES

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE

3. Exposed combustible trim and the edges of sheath≠
0
() ing materials such as wood siding, flooring and dry≠wall shall be permitted to abut the masonry fireplace side walls and hearth extension in accordance with Figure RlOOl.ll, provided such combustible trim or sheathing is a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) from the inside surface of the nearest firebox lining.

4. Exposed combustible mantels or trim may be placed

directly on the masonry fireplace front surrounding the fireplace opening providing such combustible materials are not placed within 6 inches (152 mm) of a fireplace opening. Combustible material within 12 inches (306 mm) of the fireplace opening shall not project more than 1/8 inch (3 mm) for each l-inch (25 mm) distance from such an opening.

R1001.12 Fireplace fireblocking. Fireplace fireblocking shall comply with the provisions of Section R602.8.

SECTION R1 002 MASONRY HEATERS
0
R1002.1 Definition. A masonry heater is a heating appliance constructed of concrete or solid masonry, hereinafter referred to as masonry, which is designed to absorb and store heat from a solid-fuel fire built in the firebox by routing the
exhaust gases through internal heat exchange channels in which the flow path downstream of the firebox may include
flow in a horizontal or downward direction before entering
the chimney and which delivers heat by radiation from the masonry surface of the heater.
R1002.2 Installation. Masonry heaters shall be installed in accordance with this section and comply with one of the fol≠lowing:
1.
Masonry heaters shall comply with the requirements of ASTM E 1602; or

2.
Masonry heaters shall be listed and labeled in accor≠dance with UL 1482 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer' s installation instructions.


R1002.3 Footings and foundation. The firebox floor of a masonry heater shall be a minimum thickness of 4 inches (102 mm) of noncombustible material and be supported on a
noncombustible footing and foundation in accordance with Section R1003.2.
R1002.4 Seismic reinforcing.
In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, masonry heaters shall be anchored to the masonry foundation in accordance with Section R1003.3. Seismic reinforcing shall not be required within the body of a masonry heater whose height is equal to or less than 3.5 times its body width and where the masonry chimney serving the heater is not supported by the body of the heater. Where the masonry chimney shares a common wall with the facing of the masonry heater, the chimney portion of the structure shall be reinforced in accordance with Section R1003.


R1002.5 Masonry heater clearance. Combustible materials shall not be placed within 36 inches (914 mm) of the outside surface of a masonry heater in accordance with NFPA 21 1 Section 8-7 (clearances for solid-fuel-burning appliances),
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES






and the required space between the heater and combustible material shall be fully vented to permit the free flow of air around all heater surfaces.
Exceptions:

1.
When the masonry heater wall is at least 8 inches (203 mm) thick of solid masonry and the wall of the heat exchange channels is at least 5 inches (127 mm) thick of solid masonry, combustible materials shall not be placed within 4 inches (102 mm) of the out≠side surface of a masonry heater. A clearance of at least 8 inches (203 mm) shall be provided between the gas-tight capping slab of the heater and a com≠bustible ceiling.

2.
Masonry heaters listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1482 may be installed in accordance with the listing specifications and the manufacturer's written instructions.






SECTION R1 003 MASONRY CHIMNEYS


R1003.1 Definition. A masonry chimney is a chimney con≠structed of solid masonry units, hollow masonry units grouted solid, stone or concrete, hereinafter referred to as masonry. Masonry chimneys shall be constructed, anchored, supported and reinforced as required in this chapter.
R1003.2 Footings and foundations. Footings for masonry chimneys shall be constructed of concrete or solid masonry at least 12 inches (305 mm) thick and shall extend at least 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the face of the foundation or support wall on all sides. Footings shall be founded on natural undis≠turbed earth or engineered fill below frost depth. In areas not subjected to freezing, footings shall be at least 12 inches (305 mm) below finished grade.
R1003.3 Seismic reinforcing. Masonry or concrete chim≠neys shall be constructed, anchored, supported and reinforced as required in this chapter. In all structures regulated by this
I

code assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D0, D1 or D2
I

masonry and concrete chimneys shall be reinforced and anchored as detailed in Section R1003.3.1, R1003.3.2 and R1003.4. In Seismic Design Category A or B, reinforcement II and seismic anchorage is not required.


R1003.3.1 Vertical reinforcing. For chimneys up to 40 inches (1016 mm) wide, four No. 4 continuous vertical bars, anchored in the foundation, shall be placed in the concrete, or between wythes of solid masonry, or within the cells of hollow unit masonry, and grouted in accor≠dance with Section R609.1.1. Grout shall be prevented from bonding with the flue liner so that the flue liner is free to move with thermal expansion. For chimneys more than 40 inches (1016 mm) wide, two additional No. 4 ver≠tical bars shall be installed for each additional 40 inches (1016 mm) in width or fraction thereof.
R1003.3.2 Horizontal reinforcing. Vertical reinforce≠ment shall be placed enclosed within 1/4-inch (6 mm) ties, or other reinforcing of equivalent net cross-sectional area, spaced not to exceed 18 inches (457 mm) on center in con≠crete, or placed in the bed joints of unit masonry, at a min≠


CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES

imum of every 18 inches ( 457 mm) of vertical height. Two such ties shall be installed at each bend in the vertical bars.
R1003.4 Seismic anchorage. Masonry and concrete chim≠neys and foundations in all structures regulated by this code assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D0, D1 or D2 shall be anchored at each floor, ceiling or roof line more than 6 feet (1 829 mm) above grade, except where constructed com≠pletely within the exterior walls. Anchorage shall conform to the requirements in Section Rl003.4.1.
R1003.4.1 Anchorage. Two 3/16-inch by l-inch (5 mm by 25 mm) straps shall be embedded a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) into the chimney. Straps shall be hooked around the outer bars and extend 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the bend. Each strap shall be fastened to a minimum of four floor joists with two 1/2-inch (13 mm) bolts.
Rl003.5 Corbeling. Masonry chimneys shall not be corbeled more than one-half of the chimney's wall thickness from a wall or foundation, nor shall a chimney be corbeled from a wall or foundation that is less than 12 inches (305 mm) thick unless it projects equally on each side of the wall, except that on the second story of a two-story dwelling, corbeling of chimneys on the exterior of the enclosing walls may equal the wall thickness. The projection of a single course shall not exceed onehalf the unit height or one-third of the unit bed depth, whichever is less.

Rl003.6 Changes in dimension. The chimney wall or chim≠ney flue lining shall not change in size or shape within 6 inches (152 mm) above or below where the chimney passes through floor components, ceiling components or roof components.
R1003.7 Offsets. Where a masonry chimney is constructed with a fireclay flue liner surrounded by one wythe of masonry, the maximum offset shall be such that the centerline of the flue above the offset does not extend beyond the center of the chim≠ney wall below the offset. Where the chimney offset is sup≠ported by masonry below the offset in an approved manner, the maximum offset limitations shall not apply. Each individual corbeled masonry course of the offset shall not exceed the pro≠jection limitations specified in Section Rl003.5.
R1003.8 Additional load. Chimneys shall not support loads other than their own weight unless they are designed and con≠structed to support the additional load. Construction of masonry chimneys as part of the masonry walls or reinforced concrete walls of the building shall be permitted.
R1003.9 Termination. Chimneys shall extend at least 2 feet (6 10 mm) higher than any portion of a building within 10 feet (3048 mm), but shall not be less than 3 feet (914 mm) above the highest point where the chimney passes through the roof.


R1003.9.1 Chimney caps. Masonry chimneys shall have a concrete, metal or stone cap, sloped to shed water, a drip edge and a caulked bond break around any flue liners in accordance with ASTM C 1283.
Rl003.9.2 Spark arrestors. All chimneys attached to any appliance or fireplace that burns solid fuel shall be equipped with an approved spark arrester. The spark arrestor shall meet all of the following requirements:
1.
The net free area of the arrestor shall not be less than four times the net free area of the outlet of the chim≠ney flue it serves.

2.
The arrestor 	screen shall have heat and corrosion resistance equivalent to 12 gage wire, 19-gage gal≠vanized steel or 24-gage stainless steel.


3.
Openings shall not permit the passage of spheres having a diameter greater than 1/2 inch (13 mm) nor block the passage of spheres having a diameter less
than 3/8 inch (10 mm).

4.
The spark arrestor shall be accessible for cleaning and the screen or chimney cap shall be removable to allow for cleaning of the chimney flue.



R1003.9.3 Rain caps. Where a masonry or metal rain cap is installed on a masonry chimney, the net free area under the cap shall not be less than four times the net free area of the outlet of the chimney flue it serves.









R1003.10 Wall thickness. Masonry chimney walls shall be constructed of solid masonry units or hollow masonry units grouted solid with not less than a4-inch (102 mm) nominal thickness.


R1003.10.1 Masonry veneer chimneys. Where masonry
is used to veneer a frame chimney, through-flashing and
weep holes shall be installed as required by Section R703 .

R1003.11 Flue lining (material). Masonry chimneys shall be lined. The lining material shall be appropriate for the type of appliance connected, according to the terms of the appli≠
0

ance listing and manufacturer's instructions.
R1003.11.1 Residential-type appliances (general). Flue
lining systems shall comply with one of the following:

1.
Clay flue lining complying with the requirements of ASTM C315.

2.
Listed and labeled chimney lining systems comply≠ing with UL 1777.

3.
Factory-built chimneys or chimney units listed for installation within masonry chimneys.

4.
Other approved materials that will resist corrosion,
erosion, softening or cracking from flue gases and
condensate at temperatures up to 1,800∞F (982∞C).





R1003.11.2 Flue linings for specific appliances. Flue lin≠
ings other than these covered in Section Rl003.11.1,
intended for use with specific types of appliances, shall
comply with Sections Rl003.11.3 through R1003.11.6.



Rl003.11.3 Gas appliances. Flue lining systems for gas
appliances shall be in accordance with the California
Mechanical Code.


R1003.11.4 Pellet fuel-burning appliances. Flue lining
and vent systems for use in masonry chimneys with pellet
fuel-burning appliances shall be limited to the following:

1.
Flue 	lining systems complying with Section Rl003.1 1.1.

2.
Pellet vents listed for installation within masonry chimneys. (See Section Rl003.11.6 for marking.)









2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE


R1003.11.5 Oil-fired appliances approved for nse with Type L vent. Flue lining and vent systems for use in masonry chimneys with oil-fired appliances approved for use with Type L vent shall be limited to the following:
C)
1. Flue lining systems complying with Section R1003.1 1.1.
2. Listed chimney liners complying with UL 641. (See
Section R1003.11.6 for marking.)

R1003.11.6 Notice of usage. When a flue is relined with a material

complying with Section R1003.11.1, the chimney shall be plainly and permanently identified by a label attached to a wall, ceiling or other conspicuous loca≠tion adjacent to where the connector enters the chimney.
() 	The label shall include the following message or equiva≠lent language:
THIS CHIMNEY FLUE IS FOR USE ONLY WITH [TYPE OR CATEGORY OF APPLIANCE] APPLI≠ANCES THAT BURN [TYPE OF FUEL] . DO NOT CONNECT OTHER TYPES OF APPLIANCES.
R1003.12 Clay flue lining (installation). Clay flue liners
shall be installed in accordance with ASTM C 1283 and
extend from a point not less than 8 inches (203 mm) below



the lowest inlet or, in the case of fireplaces, from the top of the smoke chamber to a point above the enclosing walls. The lining shall be carried up vertically, with a maximum slope no greater than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from the vertical.
Clay flue liners shall be laid in medium-duty water insolu≠
ble refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C 199 with tight mortar joints left smooth on the inside and installed to main≠tain an air space or insulation not to exceed the thickness of the flue liner separating the flue liners from the interior face of the chimney masonry walls. Flue liners shall be supported on all sides. Only enough mortar shall be placed to make the joint and hold the liners in position.
R1003.12.1 Listed materials. Listed materials used as flue linings shall be installed in accordance with the terms of their listings and manufacturer' s instructions.
R1003.12.2 Space around lining. The space surrounding a chimney lining system or vent installed within a masonry chimney shall not be used to vent any other appliance.
Exception: This shall not prevent the installation of a separate flue lining in accordance with the manufac≠turer's installation instructions.


R1003.13 Multiple flues. When two or more flues are located in the same chimney, masonry wythes shall be built between adjacent flue linings. The masonry wythes shall be at least 4 inches (102 mm) thick and bonded into the walls of the chimney.
Exception: When venting only one appliance, two flues may adjoin each other in the same chimney with only the flue lining separation between them. The joints of the adjacent flue linings shall be staggered at least 4 inches (102 mm).
R1003.14 Flue area (appliance). Chimney flues shall not be smaller in area than that of the area of the connector from the
CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES
appliance [see Tables R1003.14(1) and Rl003.14(2)]. The sizing of a chimney flue to which multiple appliance venting systems are connected shall be in accordance with the Cali≠fornia Mechanical Code.
TABLE R1 003.14(1)
NET CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA OF ROUND FLUE SIZESï


FLUE SIZE, INSIDE DIAMETER  CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA  
(inches)  (square inches)  
6  28  
7  38  
8  50  
10  78  
103/4  90  
12  113  
15  176  
18  254  

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2ï
a. Flue sizes are based on ASTM C 315.
TABLE R1003.14(2)
NET CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA OF SQUARE AND
RECTANGULAR FLUE SIZES



2
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mmï

R1003.15 Flue area (masonry fireplace). Flue sizing for chimneys serving fireplaces shall be in accordance with Sec≠tion R1003.15.1 or Section R1003.15.2.
R1003.15.1 Option 1. Round chimney flues shall have a minimum net cross-sectional area of at least 1I 2 of the fire≠
1

place opening. Square chimney flues shall have a mini≠mum net cross-sectional area of 1/10 of the fireplace opening. Rectangular chimney flues with an aspect ratio less than 2 to 1 shall have a minimum net cross-sectional
1

area of /0 of the fireplace opening. Rectangular chimney
1




flues with an aspect ratio of 2 to 1 or more shall have a minimum net cross-sectional area of 1/8 of the fireplace opening. Cross-sectional areas of clay flue linings are shown in Tables R1003.14(1) and R1003.14(2) or as pro≠vided by the manufacturer or as measured in the field.
R1003.15.2 Option 2. The minimum net cross-sectional area of the chimney flue shall be determined in accordance with Figure R1003.15.2. A flue size providing at least the equivalent net cross-sectional area shall be used. Cross≠sectional areas of clay flue linings are shown in Tables R1003.14(1) and R1003.14(2) or as provided by the manu≠facturer or as measured in the field. The height of the chimney shall be measured from the firebox floor to the top of the chimney flue.
R1003.16 Inlet. Inlets to masonry chimneys shall enter from
the side. Inlets shall have a thimble of fireclay, rigid refrac≠
tory material or metal that will prevent the connector from
224 269
187 214
;s:;
<[
w
a: 140 168
<[-' <[
t5
I
110 124
0
a: 76u
91;s:;::;!;
70 82
53 58
32 37
13 16



CCI)
HEIGHT, MEASURED FROM FLOOR
zw
afll
OF COMBUSTION CHAMBER TO
g

TOP OF FLUE IFTI
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2ï
FIGURE R1003.15.2 FLUE SIZES FOR MASONRY CHIMNEYS
510


pulling out of the inlet or from extending beyond the wall of the liner.
0 R1003.17 Masonry chimney cleanout openings. Cleanout openings shall be provided within 6 inches (152 mm) of the base of each flue within every masonry chimney. The upper edge of the cleanout shall be located at least 6 inches (152 mm) below the lowest chimney inlet opening. The height of the opening shall be at least 6 inches (152 mm). The cleanout
0

shall be provided with a noncombustible cover.
Exception: Chimney flues serving masonry fireplaces
where cleaning is possible through the fireplace opening.

R1003.18 Chimney clearances. Any portion of a masonry chimney located in the interior of the building or within the exterior wall of the building shall have a minimum air space
0 clearance to combustibles of 2 inches (51 mm). Chimneys located entirely outside the exterior walls of the building, including chimneys that pass through the soffit or cornice,


3000 2800

2600 0
2400 2200 2000 1800 1600 1400 1200

1000 0
800 600 400 200


<z
(!l-
H!  g
Ll:≠
0
2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE








MASONRY ABUTTING COMBUSTIBLE SHEATHING 12 IN. FROM FLUE UNING


1 IN. CLEARANCE (AIR SPACE)
TO COMBUSTIBLE SHEATHING

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

shall have a minimum air space clearance of 1 inch (25 mm).
The air space shall not be filled, except to provide fire block≠ing in accordance with Section R1003.19.
Exceptions:
1. Masonry chimneys equipped with a chimney lining system listed and labeled for use in chimneys in con≠tact with combustibles in accordance with UL 1777 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer' s installation instructions are permitted to have com≠bustible material in contact with their exterior sur≠faces.


2. When masonry chimneys are constructed as part of masonry or concrete walls, combustible materials shall not be in contact with the masonry or concrete wall less than 12 inches (305 mm) from the inside surface of the nearest flue lining.
3. Exposed combustible trim and the edges of sheath≠ing materials, such as wood siding and flooring, shall be permitted to abut the masonry chimney side walls, in accordance with Figure R1003.18, pro≠vided such combustible trim or sheathing is a mini≠mum of 12 inches (305 mm) from the inside surface of the nearest flue lining. Combustible material and trim shall not overlap the comers of the chimney by more than 1 inch (25 mm).

R1003.19 Chimney fireblocking. All spaces between chim≠neys and floors and ceilings through which chimneys pass
() 	shall be fireblocked with noncombustible material securely fastened in place. The fireblocking of spaces between chim≠neys and wood joists, beams or headers shall be self-support≠ing or be placed on strips of metal or metal lath laid across the spaces between combustible material and the chimney.
R1003.20 Chimney crickets. Chimneys shall be provided with crickets when the dimension parallel to the ridgeline is greater than 30 inches (762 mm) and does not intersect the ridgeline. The intersection of the cricket and the chimney shall be flashed and counterflashed in the same manner as normal roof-chimney intersections. Crickets shall be con≠structed in compliance with Figure R1003.20 and Table R1003 .20.

"-----/



CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES
TABLE R1003.20 CRICKET DIMENSIONS

ROOF SLOPE  H  
12 -12  1/2 ofW  
8-12  1/3 ofW  
6-12  1/4 ofW  
4-12  1/6 ofW  
3-12  1/8 ofW  

SECTION R1 004 FACTORY-BUILT FIREPLACES

R1004.1 General. Factory-built fireplaces shall be listed and labeled and shall be installed in accordance with the condi≠tions of the listing. Factory-built fireplaces shall be tested in accordance with UL 127.
R1004.2 Hearth extensions. Hearth extensions of approved factory-built fireplaces shall be installed in accordance with the listing of the fireplace. The hearth extension shall be read≠ily distinguishable from the surrounding floor area. Listed and labeled hearth extensions shall comply with UL 1618.
R1004.3 Decorative shrouds. Decorative shrouds shall not be installed at the termination of chimneys for factory-built fireplaces except where the shrouds are listed and labeled for use with the specific factory-built fireplace system and installed in accordance with the manufacturer' s installation instructions.
>
SECTION R1 005 FACTORY-BUll T CHIMNEYS

R1005.1 Listing. Factory-built chimneys shall be listed and labeled and shall be installed and terminated in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
R1005.2 Decorative shrouds. Decorative shrouds shall not be installed at the termination of factory-built chimneys except where the shrouds are listed and labeled for use with the specific factory-built chimney system and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
FIGURE R1003.18
CLEARANCE FROM COMBUSTIBLES

2013 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE 	511



CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES
FLUE LINER



CJ

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.
FIGURE R1 003.20 CHIMNEY CRICKET



R1005.3 Solid-fuel appliances. Factory-built chimneys installed in dwelling units with solid-fuel-burning appliances shall comply with the Type HT requirements of UL 103 and shall be marked "Type HT and "Residential Type and Build≠ing Heating Appliance Chimney."

Exception: Chimneys for use with open combustion chamber fireplaces shall comply with the requirements of UL 103 and shall be marked "Residential Type and Build≠ing Heating Appliance Chimney."
Chimneys for use with open combustion chamber appliances installed in buildings other than dwelling units shall comply with the requirements of UL 103 and shall be marked "Building Heating Appliance Chimney" or "Resi≠dential Type and Building Heating Appliance Chimney."
R1005.4 Factory-built fireplaces. Chimneys for use with factory-built fireplaces shall comply with the requirements of UL 127.
RlOOS.S Support. Where factory-built chimneys are sup≠ported by structural members, such as joists and rafters, those members shall be designed to support the additional load.
R1005.6 Medium-heat appliances. Factory-built chimneys for medium-heat appliances producing flue gases having a temperature above 1,000∞F (538∞C), measured at the entrance to the chimney shall comply with UL 959.
Rl005.7 Factory-built chimney offsets. Where a factory≠built chimney assembly incorporates offsets, no part of the chimney shall be at an angle of more than 30 degrees from vertical at any point in the assembly and the chimney assem≠bly shall not include more than four elbows.
SECTION R1 006
EXTERIOR AIR SUPPLY

R1006.1 Exterior air. Factory-built or masonry fireplaces covered in this chapter shall be equipped with an exterior air supply to assure proper fuel combustion unless the room is mechanically ventilated and controlled so that the indoor pressure is neutral or positive.
Rl006.1.1 Factory-built fireplaces. Exterior combustion
air ducts for factory-built fireplaces shall be a listed com≠
ponent of the fireplace and shall be installed according to
the fireplace manufacturer's instructions.

R1006.1.2 Masonry fireplaces. Listed combustion air
0

ducts for masonry fireplaces shall be installed according to
the terms of their listing and the manufacturer's instruc≠
tions.

Rl006.2 Exterior air intake. The exterior air intake shall be capable of supplying all combustion air from the exterior of the dwelling or from spaces within the dwelling ventilated with outside air such as nonmechanically ventilated crawl or attic spaces. The exterior air intake shall not be located within the garage or basement of the dwelling nor shall the air intake be located at an elevation higher than the firebox. The exte≠rior air intake shall be covered with a corrosion-resistant screen of 1/4-inch (6 mm) mesh.
R1006.3 Clearance. Unlisted combustion air ducts shall be installed with a minimum l-inch (25 mm) clearance to com≠
(
)

bustibles for all parts of the duct within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the duct outlet. R1006.4 Passageway. The combustion air passageway shall
2

be a minimum of 6 square inches (3870 mm) and not more
2

than 55 square inches (0.035 m), except that combustion air systems for listed fireplaces shall be constructed according to the fireplace manufacturer's instructions.


R1006.5 Outlet. Locating the exterior air outlet in the back or sides of the firebox chamber or within 24 inches ( 610 mm) of the firebox opening on or near the floor is permitted. The outlet shall be closable and designed to prevent burning mate≠rial from dropping into concealed combustible spaces.

