---
chapter: Chapter 10
title: ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC)
---

ARTICLE 1
ENERGY BUILDING REGULATIONS


10-101. Scope.
(a)
This article contains administrative regulations relating to the energy building regulations in Title 24, Part 6. This article applies to all residential and nonresidential buildings.

(b)
Nothing in this article lessens any necessary qualifications or responsibilities of licensed or registered building professionals or other designers or builders, or the duties of enforcement agencies, that exist under state or local law.


Authority: Sections 25402 and 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Sections 25402 and 25402.1, Public Resources Code.
HISTORY:
1.
New Article 1 (Section 1401) filed 5-3-76; effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register 76, No. 19).

2.
Amendment filed 8-17-77; designated effective 3-11-78 (Register 77, No. 34).

3.
Repealer of Article 1 (Section 1401) and new Article 1 (Sections 1401-1408, not consecutive) filed 12-9-81; designated effective 7-1-82 (Register 81, No. 50).

4.
Amendment filed 12-27-84; designated effective 1-1-85 pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.2 (d) (Register 84, No. 52).



10-102. Definitions. In this article the following definitions apply:
ACCEPTANCE REQUIREMENTS are "acceptance requirements for code compliance" as defined in Section
100.1 (b) of Part 6.
ACCEPTANCE TEST TECHNICIAN is a Field Technician as defined in Section 10-102 who is certified by an authorized Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider pursuant to the requirements of Section 10-103-A or 10-103-B.
LIGHTING CONTROLS ACCEPTANCE TEST TECHNICIAN is a professional certified by an authorized Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider to perform nonresidential lighting controls acceptance tests and complete the documentation required for nonresidential lighting controls acceptance tests as required by the Building Energy Efficiency Standards.
MECHANICAL ACCEPTANCE TEST TECHNICIAN
is a professional certified by an authorized Mechanical Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider to perform nonresidential mechanical acceptance tests and complete the documentation required for nonresidential mechanical acceptance tests as required by the Building Energy Efficiency Standards.

ACCEPTANCE TEST EMPLOYER is a person or entity who employs an Acceptance Test Technician and is certified by an authorized Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider.
LIGHTING CONTROLS ACCEPTANCE TEST EMPLOYER is a person or entity who is the employer ofa Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Technician and is certified by an authorized Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider.

MECHANICAL ACCEPTANCE TEST EMPLOYER
is a person or entity who is the employer of a Mechanical Acceptance Test Technician and is certified by an authorized Mechanical Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider.
ACCEPTANCE TEST TECHNICIAN CERTIFICATION PROVIDER is an agency, organization or entity approved by the Energy Commission to train and certify Acceptance Test Technicians and Acceptance Test Employers according to the requirements of Section 10-103-A or B.
LIGHTING CONTROLS ACCEPTANCE TEST TECHNICIAN CERTIFICATION PROVIDER is an agency, organization or entity approved by the Energy Commission to train and certify Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Technicians and Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Employers according to the requirements of Section 10-103-A.
MECHANICAL ACCEPTANCE TEST TECHNICIAN CERTIFICATION PROVIDER is an agency, organization or entity approved by the Energy Commission to train and certify Mechanical Acceptance Test Technicians and Mechanical Acceptance Test Employers according to the requirements of Section 10-103-B.
NOTE: Authority cited: Sections 25402, 25402.1, and 25213, Public Resources Code. Reference: Sections 25007, 25402(a)-(b), 25402.1, 25402.4, 25402.5, 25402.8 and 25910, Public Resources Code.
ACM means ALTERNATIVE CALCULATION METHOD are compliance software, or alternative component packages, or exceptional methods approved by the Commission under Section 10-109. ACMs are also referred to as Compliance Software.
ACM APPROVAL MANUALS are the documents establishing the requirements for Energy Commission approval of Compliance Software used to demonstrate compliance with the Building Energy Efficiency Standards for Residential and Nonresidential Buildings currently adopted by the Energy Commission.
ACM REFERENCE MANUAL is the document establishing the procedures required to implement Sections 140.1 and 150.1 of Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of Regulations in Compliance Software.
ALTERNATIVE COMPONENT PACKAGE is a set of building measures whose aggregate calculated energy use is less than or equal to the maximum allowed Energy Budget.
APPLIANCE EFFICIENCY REGULATIONS are the regulations in Title 20, Section 1601 et. Seq. of the California Code of Regulations.
APPROVED CALCULATION METHOD is compliance software, or alternative component packages, or exceptional methods approved under Section 10-109.
BUILDING ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS are those regulations contained in Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of Regulations.
BUILDING PERMIT is an electrical, plumbing, mechanical, building or other permit or approval, that is issued by an enforcement agency, and that authorizes any construction that is subject to Part 6.
CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION is the California State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission.
COMMISSION is the State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission.
COMPLEX MECHANICAL SYSTEM is defined here for the purposes of complying with the Design Phase Review component of Section 10-103(a)l. Complex Mechanical Systems are systems that include 1) fan systems each serving multiple thermostatically controlled zones, or 2) built-up air handler systems (non-unitary or non-packaged HVAC equipment), or 3) hydronic or steam heating systems, or 4) hydronic cooling systems. Complex systems are NOT the following: unitary or packagedequipmentlistedin Tables 112-A, 112-B, 112-C, and 112-E that each serve one zone, or two-pipe, heating only systems serving one or more zones.
COMPLIANCE APPROACH is any one of the allowable methods by which the design and construction of a building may be demonstrated to be in compliance with Part 6. The compliance approaches are the performance compliance approach and the prescriptive compliance approach. The requirements for each compliance approach are set forth in Section 100.0( e )2 of Part 6.
COMPLIANCE DOCUMENT is any ofthe documents specified in Section 10-103(a) utilized to demonstrate compliance with Part 6 (i.e., Certificate of Compliance, Certificate of Installation, Certificate of Acceptance, and Certificate of Verification).
COMPLIANCE SOFTWARE is software that has been approved pursuant to Section 10-109 of Part 1.
CONDITIONED FLOOR AREA is the "conditioned floor II area" as defined in Section 100.1 (b) of Part 6.
CRRC-1 is the Cool Roof Rating Council document entitled "Product Rating Program."
DATA REGISTRY is a web service with a user interface and database maintained by a Registration Provider that complies with the applicable requirements in Reference Joint Appendix JA7, with guidance from the Data Registry Requirements Manual, and provides for registration of residential or nonresidential compliance documentation used for demonstrating compliance with Part 6.
RESIDENTIAL DATA REGISTRY is a data registry that is maintained by a HERS Provider that provides for registra
tion, when required by Part 6 of all residential compliance documentation and the nonresidential Certificate of Verification.
NONRESIDENTIAL DATA REGISTRY is a data registry that is maintained by a Registration Provider approved by the Commission that provides for registration, when required by Part 6 of all nonresidential compliance documentation. However, nonresidential data registries may not provide for registration of nonresidential Certificates of Verification.
DATA REGISTRY REQUIREMENTS MANUAL is a document that provides additional detailed guidance regarding the functional and technical aspects of the data registry requirements given in Joint Appendix JA7.
DOCUMENTATION AUTHOR is a person who prepares a Title 24 Part 6 compliance document that must subsequently be reviewed and signed by a responsible person in order to certify compliance with Part 6.
ENERGY BUDGET is the "energy budget" as defined in Sec
tion 100.1(b) of Part 6.
ENERGY COMMISSION is the California State Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission.
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY is the city, county or state agency responsible for issuing a building permit.
EXCEPTIONAL METHOD is a method for estimating the energy performance of building features that cannot be adequately modeled using existing Compliance Software and that is approved by the Executive Director.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR is the executive director of the Commission.
FIELD TECHNICIAN is a person who performs acceptance tests in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix NA 7, and reports the results of the acceptance tests on the Certificate of Acceptance in accordance with the requirements of Section 10-103(a)4.
HERS is the California Home Energy Rating System as described in Title 20, Chapter 4, Article 8, Section 1670.
HERS PROVIDER is an organization that administers a home energy rating system as described in Title 20, Chapter 4, Article 8, Section 1670.
HERS PROVIDER DATA REGISTRY is a data registry maintained by a HERS provider.
HERS RATER is a person who has been trained, tested, and certified by a HERS Provider to perform the field verification and diagnostic testing required for demonstrating compliance with the Part 6 as described in Title 20, Chapter 4, Atticle 8, Section 1670(i).
HVAC SYSTEM is the "HVAC system" as defined in Section II 100.1(b) of Part 6.
MANUFACTURED DEVICE is the "manufactured device" as defined in Section 100.1 (b) of Part 6. II
NFRC 100 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document entitled "NFRC 100: Procedure for Determining Fenestration Product U-factors." (2011) NFRC 100 includes
II

procedures for the Component Modeling Approach (CMA)
2013 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC)
II and site built fenestration formerly included in a separate document, NFRC 100-SB.
NFRC 200 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document entitled "NFRC 200: Procedure for Determining Fenestration Product Solar Heat Gain Coefficients and Visible
Transmittance at Normal Incidence." (2011).
NFRC 202 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document entitled "NFRC 202: Procedures for Determining Translucent Fenestration Product Visible Transmittance at Normal Incidence." (2011).
NFRC 203 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document entitled "NFRC 203: Procedure for Determining Visible Transmittance of Tubular Day lighting Devices." (2012).
NFRC 400 is the National Fenestration Rating Council document entitled "NFRC 400: Procedure for Determining Fenestration Product Air Leakage." (2010).
NSHP GUIDEBOOK is the New Solar Homes Partnership Guidebook currently adopted by the Energy Commission.
PART 6 is Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of Regula
tions.
PUBLIC ADVISER is the Public Adviser ofthe Commission.
R-VALUE is the measure of the thermal resistance of insulation or any material or building component expressed in fe -hr-F/Btu.
RECORD DRAWINGS are drawings that document the as-installed location and performance data on all lighting and space conditioning system components, devices, appliances and equipment, including but not limited to wiring sequences, control sequences, duct and pipe distribution system layout and sizes, space conditioning system terminal device layout and air flow rates, hydronic system and flow rates, and connections for the space conditioning system. Record drawings are sometimes called "as builts."
REFERENCE APPENDICES is the support document for the Building Energy Efficiency Standards and the ACM Approval Manuals. The document consists of three sections: the Reference Joint Appendices (JA), the Reference Residential Appendices (RA), and the Reference Nonresidential
Appendices (NA) currently adopted by the Energy Commission.
REFERENCE JOINT APPENDICES are the Reference Joint Appendices currently adopted by the Energy Commission.
REFERENCE NONRESIDENTIAL APPENDICES are the Reference Nonresidential Appendices currently adopted by the Energy Commission.
REFERENCE RESIDENTIAL APPENDICES are the Reference Residential Appendices currently adopted by the Energy Commission.
REGISTERED DOCUMENT is a document that has been submitted to a residential or nonresidential data registry for relenlion, and Lhe dala regislry has assigned a unique regislration number to the document.
REGISTRATION PROVIDER is an organization that administers a data registry service that conforms to the requirements in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
STANDARD DESIGN BUILDING is a "Standard Design Building" as defined in Section 100.1(b) of Part 6.
NOTE: Authority cited: Sections 25402 and 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Sections 25402 and 25402.1, Public Resources Code.
Authority: Sections 25402 and 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Sections 25402 and 25402.1, Public Resources Code. HISTORY:
1.
Amendment filed 12-27-84; designated effective 1-1-85 pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.2 (d) (Register 84, No. 52).

2.
Amendment filed 12-4-86; effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register 87, No.1).

3.
(CEC 1192) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to amend Section 10-102, Part 1, Title 24, California Code ofRegulations. Filed with the secretary ofstate June 12, 1992; publication date July 15, 1992; effective 30 days thereafter. Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on June 8, 1992.

4.
(CEC 1194) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to amend Section 10-102, Part 6, Title 24, California Code ofRegulations. Filed with the secretary of state May 24, 1995; effective 30 days thereafter. Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on May 23, 1995.


10-103. Permit, certificate, informational and enforcement requirements for designers, installers, builders, manufacturers and suppliers.
(a) Documentation. The following documentation is required to demonstrate compliance with Part 6.This documentation shall meet the requirements of Section 10-103(a) or alternatives approved by the Executive Director.
1. 	Certificate of Compliance. For all buildings, the Certificate of Compliance described in Section 10-103 shall be signed by the person in charge of the building II design, who is eligible under Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code to accept responsibility for the building design (responsible person); and submitted in
II
accordance with Sections 10-103(a)1 and 10-103(a)2 to certify conformance with Part 6. If more than one person has responsibility for the building design, each person shall sign the Certificate of Compliance document(s) applicable to that portion of the design for
which the person is responsible. Alternatively, the person with chief responsibility for the building design shall prepare and sign the Certificate of Compliance document(s) for the entire building design. Subject to the requirements of Sections 10-103(a)1 and 10-103(a)2, persons who prepare Certificate of Compliance documents (documentation authors) shall sign a declaration statement on the documents they prepare to certify the information provided on the documentation is accurate and complete. In accordance with applicable requirements of 10-1 03(a) 1, the signatures provided by responsible persons and documentation authors shall be original signatures on paper documents or electronic signatures on electronic documents conforming to the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.

For all nonresidential buildings, the Design Review Kickoff Certificate(s) ofCompliance, and Construction Document Design Review Checklist Certificate(s) of Compliance shall be completed and signed by a licensed professional engineer. For buildings less than 10,000 square feet, the licensed professional engineer may be the engineer of record. For buildings greater than 10,000 square feet but less than 50,000 square feet, the licensed professional engineer shall be a qualified in-house engineer with no other project involvement or a third-party engineer. Contractors accepting the responsibilities of the engineer under the provision of the Business and Professions Code may also complete and sign these certificates. For buildings greater than 50,000 square feet and all buildings with complex mechanical systems serving more than 10,000 square feet, the licensed professional engineer shall be a third party.
A. All Certificate of Compliance documentation shall conform to a format and informational order and content approved by the Energy Commission.
These documents shall:
i. 	Identify the energy features, performance specifications, materials, components, and manufactured devices required for compliance with Part
6.
ii. 	Identify the building project name and location. The building project name and location identification on the Certificate of Compliance shall be consistent with the building project name and location identification given on the other applicable building design plans and specifications submitted to the enforcement agency for approval with the building permit application.
iii. Display the unique registration number assigned by the data registry if Section 10-1 03( a) 1 requires the document to be registered.
iv.
Include a declaration statement to the effect that the building energy features, performance specifications, materials, components, and manufactured devices for the building design identified on the Certificate of Compliance indicate the building is in compliance with the requirements ofTitle 24, Parts 1 and 6, and the building design features identified on the Certificate of Compliance are consistent with the building design features identified on the other applicable compliance documents, worksheets, calculations, plans, and specifications submitted to the enforcement agency for approval with the building permit application.

v.
Be signed by the documentation author to certify the documentation is accurate and complete. When document registration is required by Section 10-103(a)1, the signature shall be an electronic signature on an electronic document in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.



vi.
Be signed by the 	responsible person eligible under Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code to accept responsibility for the design to certify conformance with Part 6. When document registration is required by Section 10-103(a)1, the signature shall be an electronic signature on an electronic document in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.

B.
For all low-rise residential buildings for which compliance requires HERS field verification, the person(s) responsible for the Certificate(s) of Compliance shall submit the Certificate(s) for registration and retention to a HERS provider data registry. The submittals to the HERS provider data registry shall be made electronically in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.


Contingent upon availability and approval ofan electronic document repository by the Executive Director, Certificate of Compliance documents that are registered and retained by a HERS provider data registry shall also be automatically transmitted by the data registry, to an electronic document repository for retention in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
C. For alterations 	to existing residential buildings for which HERS field verification is not required such as water heater and window replacements, and for additions to existing residential buildings that are less than 300 square feet for which HERS field verification is not required, the enforcement agencies may at their discretion not require any Certificate of Compliance documentation, or may develop simplified Certificate of Compliance documentation for demonstrating compliance with the Standards.
Exemptions from submitting compliance documentation shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of this code or other provisions of law.
D. Beginning 	on January 1, 2015, contingent upon approval ofdata registry(s) by the Commission, all nonresidential buildings, high-rise residential buildings, and hotels and motels, when designated to allow use of an occupancy group or type regulated by Part 6 the person(s) responsible for the Certificate(s) of Compliance shall submit the Certificate(s) for registration and retention to a data registry approved by the Commission. The submittals to the approved data registry shall be made electronically in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
Contingent upon availability and approval of an electronic document repository by the Executive Director, Certificate of Compliance documents that are registered and retained by an approved data registry shall also be automatically transmitted by the data registry to an electronic document repository for retention in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
2013 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC)
>

2. 	Application for a building permit. Each application for a building permit subject to Part 6 shall contain at least one copy of the documents specified in Sections 10-103(a)2A, 10-103(a)2B and 10-103(a)2C.
A. For all newly constructed buildings, additions, alterations, or repairs regulated by Part 6 the applicant shall submit the applicable Certificate(s) of Compliance to the enforcement agency for approval. The certificate(s) shall conform to the requirements of Section 10-103(a)1, and shall be approved by the local enforcement agency, in accordance with all applicable requirements of Section 10-103(d), by stamp or authorized signature prior to issuance of a building permit. A copy ofthe Certificate(s) ofCompliance shall be included with the documentation the builder provides to the building owner at occupancy as specified in Section 1 0-103(b ).
For alterations to existing residential buildings for which HERS field verification is required, and when the enforcement agency does not require building design plans to be submitted with the application for a building permit, the applicable Certificate ofCompliance documentation specified in Section 10-103(a)1 is not required to be approved by the enforcement agency prior to issuance of a building permit, but shall be approved by the enforcement agency prior to final inspection of the dwelling unit, and shall be made available to the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections.
When the enforcement agency requires building design plans to be submitted with the application for a building permit, the applicable Certificate ofCompliance documents shall be incorporated into the building design plans. When Section 10-103(a)1 requires document registration, the certificate(s) that are incorporated into the building design plans shall be copies of the registered Certificate of Compliance documents from a HERS provider data registry, or a data registry approved by the Commission.
B. When the enforcement agency requires building design plans and specifications to be submitted with the application for a building permit, the plans shall conform to the specifications for the features, materials, components, and manufactured devices identified on the Certificate(s) of Compliance, and shall conform to all other applicable requirements of Part
6. Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the enforcement agency for any other feature, material, component, or manufactured device that Part 6 requires be indicated on the building design plans and specifications. Plans and specifications submitted with each application for a building permit for nonresidential buildings, high-rise residential buildings and hotels and motels shall provide acceptance requirements for l:oue l:omplianl:e of each feature, material, component or manufactured device when acceptance requirements are required under Part 6. Plans and specifications for nonresidential buildings, high-rise residential buildings and hotels and motels shall require, and indicate with a prominent note on the plans, that within 90 days after the Enforcement Agency issues a permanent final occupancy permit, record drawings be provided to the building owner.
For all buildings, ifthe specification for a building design feature, material, component, or manufactured device is changed before final construction or installation, such that the building may no longer comply with Part 6 the building must be brought II back into compliance, and so indicated on amended plans, specifications, and Certificate(s) of Compliance that shall be submitted to the enforcement agency for approval. Such characteristics shall II
include the efficiency (or other characteristic regulated by Part 6) of each building design feature, material, component, or device.
C. The enforcement agency shall have the authority to require submittal of any supportive documentation that was used to generate the Certificate(s) of Compliance, including but not limited to the electronic input file for the compliance software tool that was used to generate performance method Certificate(s) of Compliance; or any other supportive documentation that is necessary to demonstrate that the building design conforms to the requirements of Part 6.

3. 	Certificate of Installation. For all buildings, the person in charge of the construction or installation, who is eligible under Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code to accept responsibility for the construction or installation of features, materials, components, or manufactured devices regulated by Part 6 or the Appli
ance Efficiency Regulations (responsible person) shall sign and submit Certificate of Installation documentation as specified in Section 10-103(a)3 to certify conformance with Part 6. If more than one person has responsibility for the construction or installation, each person shall sign and submit the Certificate of Installation documentation applicable to the portion of the construction or installation for which they are responsible; alternatively, the person with chief responsibility for the construction or installation shall sign and submit the Certificate of Installation documentation for the entire construction or installation scope of work for the project. Subject to the requirements of Section 10-1 03(a)3, persons who prepare Certificate of Installation documentation (documentation authors) shall sign a declaration statement on the documents they prepare to certify the information provided on the documentation is accurate and complete. In accordance with applicable requirements of 10-1 03(a)3, the signatures provided by responsible persons and documentation authors shall be original signatures on paper documents or electronic signatures on electronic documents conforming to the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.

A. All Certificate of Installation documentation shall conform to a format and informational order and content approved by the Energy Commission.
These documents shall:
1. 	Identify the features, materials, components, manufactured devices, and system performance diagnostic results required to demonstrate compliance with Part 6 and the Appliance Efficiency Rregulations.
ii. 	State the number of the building permit under which the construction or installation was performed.
iii 	Display the unique registration number assigned by the data registry if Section 10-103(a)3 requires the document to be registered.
IV.
Include a declaration statement indicating that the constructed or installed features, materials, components or manufactured devices (the installation) identified on the Certificate of Installation conforms to all applicable codes and regulations, and the installation conforms to the requirements given on the plans and specifications approved by the enforcement agency.

v.
Be signed by the documentation author to certify the documentation is accurate and complete. When document registration is required by Section 10-103(a)3, the signature shall be an electronic signature on an electronic document in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.


v1. 	Be signed by the responsible person eligible under Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code to accept responsibility for constmction or installation in the applicable classification for the scope of work specified on the Certificate of Installation document(s), or shall be signed by their authorized representative. When document registration is required by Section 10-103(a)3, the signature shall be an electronic signature on an electronic document in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
B. For all low-rise residential buildings for which compliance requires HERS field verification, the person(s) responsible for the Certificate(s) of Installation, or their authorized representative(s), shall submit all Certificate of Installation documentation that is applicable to the building to a HERS provider data registry for registration and retention in accordance with procedures specified in Refer

II 	ence Residential Appendix RA2. The submittals to the HERS provider data registry shall be made electronically in accordance with the specifications in
II 	Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
Contingent upon availability and approval of an electronic document repository by the Executive Director, Certificate of Installation documents that are registered and retained by a HERS provider data registry shall also be automatically transmitted by the data registry to an electronic document repository for retention in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
C. For alterations to existing residential buildings for which HERS field verification is not required such as water heater and window replacements, and for additions to existing residential buildings that are less than 300 square feet for which HERS field verification is not required, the enforcement agencies may at their discretion not require any Certificate of Installation documentation, or may develop simplified Certificate of Installation documentation for demonstrating compliance with the Standards.
Exemptions from submitting compliance docu

mentation shall not be deemed to grant authorization
for any work to be done in any manner in violation of
this code or other provisions of law.
D. Beginning on January 1, 2015, contingent upon approval of data registry(s) by the Commission, all nonresidential buildings, high-rise residential buildings, and hotels and motels, when designated to allow use of an occupancy group or type regulated by Part 6 the person(s) responsible for the Certificate(s) of Installation shall submit the Certificate(s) for registration and retention to a data registry approved by the Commission. The submittals to the approved data registry shall be made electronically in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
Contingent upon availability and approval of an
electronic document repository by the Executive
Director, Certificate of Installation documents that
are registered and retained by an approved data reg
istry shall also be automatically transmitted by the
data registry to an electronic document repository
for retention in accordance with the specifications in
Reference Joint Appendix JA7.

E. For all buildings, 	a copy of the Certificate(s) of Installation shall be posted, or made available with the building permit(s) issued for the building, and shall be made available to the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections. When document registration is required by Section 10-103(a)3, registered copies of the Certificate(s) oflnstallation from a HERS provider data registry or a data registry approved by the Commission shall be posted or made available with the building permit( s) issued for the building, and shall be made available to the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections. If construction on any portion ofthe building subject to Part 6 will be impossible to inspect because ofsubsequent construction, the enforcement agency may require the Certificate(s) of Installation to be p~<>-~st.,.eelrl---l--ll--1~~~
2013 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC)

upon completion of that portion. A copy of the Cerii. State the number of the building permit under
tificate(s) of Installation shall be included with the documentation the builder provides to the building owner at occupancy as specified in Section 10-103(b).
4. 	Certificate of Acceptance. For all nonresidential
buildings, high-rise residential buildings and hotels and motels, when designated to allow use of an occupancy group or type regulated by Part 6 the person in charge of the acceptance testing, who is eligible under Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code to accept responsibility for the applicable scope of system design, or construction, or installation offeatures, materials, components, or manufactured devices regulated by Part 6 or the Appliance Efficiency Regulations (responsible person), shall sign and submit all applicable Certificate of Acceptance documentation in accordance with Section 10-103(a)4 and Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA 7 to certify conformance with Part 6. If more than one person has responsibility for the acceptance testing, each person shall sign and submit the Certificate of Acceptance documentation applicable to the portion of the construction or installation for which they are responsible; alternatively, the person with chief responsibility for the system design, construction or installation shall sign and submit the Certificate of Acceptance documentation for the entire construction or installation scope of work for the project. Subject to the requirements of Section 10-103(a)4, persons who prepare Certificate of Acceptance documentation (documentation authors) shall sign a declaration statement on the documents they prepare to certify the information provided on the documentation is accurate and complete. Persons who perform acceptance test procedures in accordance with the specifications in Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA 7, and report the results of the acceptance tests on the Certificate of Acceptance (field technicians) shall sign a declaration statement on the documents they submit to certify the information provided on the documentation is true and correct. In accordance with applicable requirements of Section 10-103(a)4, the signatures provided by responsible persons, field technicians, and documentation authors shall be original signatures on paper documents or electronic signatures on electronic documents conforming to the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
A. All Certificate of Acceptance documentation shall conform to a format and informational order and content approved by the Energy Commission.
These documents shall:
1. 	Identify the features, materials, components, manufactured devices, and system performance diagnostic results required to demonstrate compliance with the acceptance requirements to which the applicant must conform as indicated in the plans and specifications submitted under Section 10-103(a)2, and as specified in Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7.
which the construction or installation was performed.
iii. Display the unique registration number assigned by the data registry if Section 10-103(a)4 requires the document to be registered.
iv.
Include a declaration statement indicating that the features, materials, components or manufactured devices identified on the Certificate of Acceptance conform to the applicable acceptance requirements as indicated in the plans and specifications submitted under Section 10-103(a), and with applicable acceptance requirements and procedures specified in the Reference Nonresidential Appendix NA7, and confirms that Certificate(s) of Installation described in Section 10-103(a)3 has been completed and is posted or made available with the building permit(s) issued for the building.

v.
Be signed by the documentation author to certify the documentation is accurate and complete. When document registration is required by Section 10-103(a)4, the signature shall be an electronic signature on an electronic document in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA 7.


vi. Be signed by the field technician who performed the acceptance test procedures and reported the results on the Certificate of Acceptance. When document registration is required by Section 10-103 (a )4, the signature shall be an electronic signature on an electronic document in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
vii.
Be signed by the responsible person in charge of the acceptance testing who is eligible under Division 3 ofthe Business and Professions Code to accept responsibility for the system design, construction or installation in the applicable classification for the scope of work identified on the Certificate of Acceptance, or shall be signed by their authorized representative. When document registration is required by Section 10-103(a)4, the signature shall be an electronic signature on an electronic document in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.

B.
Beginning on January 1, 2015, contingent upon approval of data registry(s) by the Commission, all nonresidential buildings, high-rise residential buildings, and hotels and motels, when designated to allow use of an occupancy group or type regulated by Part 6 the person(s) responsible for the Certificate(s) of Acceptance shall submit the Certiticate(s) for registration and retention to a data registry approved by the Commission. The submittals to the approved data registry shall be made electronically



in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA 7.
Contingent upon availability and approval of an electronic document repository by the Executive Director, Certificate of Acceptance documents that are registered and retained by an approved data registry shall also be automatically transmitted by the data registry, to an electronic document repository for retention in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
C. A copy ofthe registered Certificate( s) ofAcceptance shall be posted, or made available with the building permit(s) issued for the building, and shall be made available to the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections. Ifconstruction on any portion ofthe building subject to Part 6 will be impossible to inspect because of subsequent construction, the enforcement agency may require the Certificate(s) of Acceptance to be posted upon completion of that portion. A copy of the Certificate(s) of Acceptance shall be included with the documentation the builder provides to the building owner at occupancy as specified in Section 10-103(b).

>
5. 	Certificate ofField Verification and Diagnostic Testing (Certificate of Verification). For all buildings for
II
which compliance requires HERS field verification, a
certified HERS Rater shall conduct all required HERS
field verification and diagnostic testing in accordance

with applicable procedures specified in Reference Appendices RA2, RA3, NA1 and NA2. All applicable Certificates of Verification documentation shall be completed, signed, and submitted by the certified HERS Rater who performed the field verification and diagnostic testing services (responsible person) in accordance with the requirements of Section 10-1 03(a)5, and Reference Appendices RA2 and NA1, to certify conformance with Part 6. If more than one rater has responsibility for the HERS verification for the building, each rater shall sign and submit the Certificate of Verification documentation applicable to the portion of the building for which they are responsible. Subject to the requirements of Section 10-103(a)5, persons who prepare Certificate of Verification documentation (documentation authors) shall sign a declaration statement on the documents they prepare to certify the information provided on the documentation is accurate and complete. The signatures provided by responsible persons and documentation authors shall be electronic signatures on electronic documents.
A. All Certificate of Verification documentation shall conform to a format and informational order and content approved by the Energy Commission.
These documents shall:
i. 	Identify the installed features, materials, components, manufactured devices, or system performance diagnostic results that require HERS verification for compliance with Part 6 as specified on the Certificate(s) of Compliance for the building.

n. 	State the number of the building permit under which the construction or installation was performed.
iii. Display the unique registration number assigned by the HERS provider data registry, and provide any additional information required by Reference Appendices RA2, RA3, NA1 and NA2.
iv.
Include a declaration statement indicating that the installed features, materials, components or manufactured devices requiring HERS verification conform to the applicable requirements in Reference Appendices RA2, RA3, NA1, NA2, and the requirements specified on the Certificate(s) of Compliance approved by the local enforcement agency, and confirms the same features, materials, components or manufactured devices are identified on the applicable Certificate(s) of Installation signed and submitted by the person(s) responsible for the construction or installation as described in Section 10-103(a)3.

v.
Be signed by the documentation author to certify the documentation is accurate and complete. The signatures shall be electronic signatures on electronic documents in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA 7.


v1. 	Be signed by the HERS Rater who performed the field verification and diagnostic testing services (responsible person). The signatures shall be electronic signatures on electronic documents in accordance with the electronic signature specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
B. For all buildings for which compliance requires HERS field verification, the certified HERS Rater responsible for the Certificate(s) of Verification shall submit the Certificates for registration and retention to a HERS provider data registry in accordance with the applicable procedures in Reference II Appendices RA2 and NAl. The submittals to the
HERS provider data registry shall be made electronically in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
Contingent upon availability and approval of an electronic document repository by the Executive Director, Certificate of Verification documents that are registered and retained by a HERS provider data registry shall also be automatically transmitted by the data registry, to an electronic document repository for retention in accordance with the specifications in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
C. For all buildings, a copy of the registered Certificate(s) ofVerification shall be posted, or made available with the building permit(s) issued for the building, and shall be made available to the enforce
2013 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC)
ment agency for all applicable inspections. If construction on any portion of the building subject to Part 6 will be impossible to inspect because ofsubsequent construction, the enforcement agency may
require the Certificate(s) of Verification to be posted upon completion of that portion. A copy ofthe registered Certificate(s) of Verification shall be included with the documentation the builder provides to the building owner at occupancy as specified in Section 10-103(b).

>
Exception to Section 10-103(a): Enforcing agencies may exempt nonresidential buildings that have no more than 1,000 square feet of conditioned floor area in the entire building and an occupant load of49 persons or less from the documentation requirements of Section 10-1 03( a), provided a statement of compliance with Part 6 is submitted and signed by a licensed engineer or the licensed architect with chief responsibility for the design.

(b) Compliance, operating, maintenance and ventilation information to be provided by builder.
1. 	Compliance information.
A. For low-rise residential buildings, at final inspection, the enforcement agency shall require the builder to leave in the building, copies of the completed, signed and submitted compliance documents for the building owner at occupancy. For low-rise residential buildings, such information shall, at a minimum, include copies of all Certificate of Compliance, Certificate oflnstallation, and Certificate of Verification documentation submitted. These documents shall be in paper or electronic format and shall conform to the applicable requirements of Section 10-103(a).
B. For nonresidential buildings, high-rise residential buildings and hotels and motels, at final inspection, the enforcement agency shall require the builder to leave in the building, copies of the completed, signed and submitted compliance documents for the building owner at occupancy. For nonresidential buildings, high-rise residential buildings and hotels and motels, such information shall include copies of all Certificate ofCompliance, Certificate ofInstallation, Certificate of Acceptance and Certificate of Verification documentation submitted. These documents shall be in paper or electronic format and shall conform to the applicable requirements of Section 10-103(a).

>
2. 	Operating information. At final inspection, the enforcement agency shall require the builder to leave in the building, for the building owner at occupancy, operating information for all applicable features, materials, components and mechanical devices installed in the building. Operating information shall include instructions on how to operate the features, materials, compo nents and mechanical devices correctly and efficiently. The instructions shall be consistent with specifications set forth by the Executive Director. For low-rise residential buildings, such information shall be contained in a folder or manual which provides all information specified in Section 10-1 03(b ). This operating information shall be in paper or electronic format.
For dwelling units, buildings or tenant spaces that are not individually owned and operated, or are centrally operated, such information shall be provided to the person(s) responsible for operating the feature, material, component or mechanical device installed in the building. This operating information shall be in paper or electronic format.

3. 	Maintenance information. At final inspection, the enforcement agency shall require the builder to leave in the building, for the building owner at occupancy, maintenance information for all features, materials, components and manufactured devices that require routine maintenance for efficient operation. Required routine maintenance actions shall be clearly stated and incorporated on a readily accessible label. The label may be limited to identifying, by title and/or publication number, the operation and maintenance manual for that particular model and type offeature, material, component or manufactured device.
For dwelling units, buildings or tenant spaces that are not individually owned and operated or are centrally operated, such information shall be provided to the person(s) responsible for maintaining thefeature, material, component or mechanical device installed in the building. This information shall be in paper or electronic format.

4. 	Ventilation information.
A. For low-rise residential buildings, the enforcement agency shall require the builder to leave in the building, for the building owner at occupancy, a description of the quantities of outdoor air that the ventilation system(s) are designed to provide to the building's conditioned space, and instructions for proper operation and maintenance of the ventilation system. For buildings or tenant spaces that are not individually owned and operated or are centrally operated, such information shall be provided to the person(s) responsible for operating and maintaining the feature, material, component or mechanical ventilation device installed in the building. This information shall be in paper or electronic format.
B. For nonresidential buildings, high-rise residential buildings and hotels/motels, the enforcement agency shall require the builder to provide the building owner at occupancy a description of the quantities of outdoor and recirculated air that the ventilation systems are designed to provide to each area. For buildings or tenant spaces that are not individually owned and operated or are centrally operated, such information shall be provided to the person(s) responsible for operating and maintaining the feature, material, component or mechanical device installed in the building. This information shall be in paper or electronic format.

(c)
Equipment information to be provided by manufacturer or supplier. The manufacturer or supplier of any manufactured device shall, upon request, provide to building designers and installers information about the device. The information shall include the efficiency (and other characteristics regulated by Part 6). This information shall be in paper or electronic format.

(d)
Enforcement agency requirements.


1. 	Permits. An enforcement agency shall not issue a building permit for any construction unless the enforcement agency determines in writing that the construction is designed to comply with the requirements of Part 6 that are in effect on the date the building permit was applied for. The enforcement agency determination shall confirm that the documentation requirements of Sections 10-103(a)1 and 10-103(a)2 have been met.
Ifa building permit has been previously issued, there has been no construction under the permit, and the permit has expired, the enforcement agency shall not issue a new permit unless the enforcement agency determines in writing that the construction is designed to comply with the requirements of Part 6 in effect on the date the new permit is applied for. The enforcement agency determination shall confirm that the documentation requirements of Sections 10-103(a)1 and 10-103(a)2 have been met.
"Determines in writing" includes, but is not limited to, approval of a building permit with a stamp normally used by the enforcement agency.
2. 	Inspection. The enforcement agency shall inspect newly constructed buildings and additions, and alterations to existing buildings to determine whether the construction or installation is consistent with the agency's approved plans and specifications, and complies with Part 6. Final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until such consistency and compliance is verified. For Occupancy Group R-3, final inspection shall not be complete until such consistency and compliance is verified.
Such verification shall include determination that:
II
A. All installed features, materials, components or manufactured devices, regulated by the Appliance Efficiency Regulations or Part 6 are indicated, when applicable, on the Certificate(s) of Installation, Cer
tificate(s) of Acceptance and Certificate(s) of Verification, and are consistent with such features, materials, components or manufactured devices given in the plans and specifications and the Certificate(s) of Compliance approved by the local enforcement agency.

II B. All required Certificates of Installation are posted, or made available with the building permit(s) issued for the building, and are made available to the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections, and that all required Certificates of Installation con
II
form to the specifications of Section 10-103(a)3.

186
C. All required Certificates of Acceptance are posted, or made available with the building permit(s) issued for the building, and are made available to the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections, and that all required Certificates of Acceptance conform to the specifications of Section 10-103(a)4.
D. All required Certificates of Verification are posted, or made available with the building permit(s) issued for the building, and are made available to the enforcement agency for all applicable inspections, and that all required Certificates of Verification conform to the specifications of Section 10-103(a)5.
Exception to Section 10-103(d): For newly constructed buildings that meet the requirements of the New Solar Homes Partnership (NSHP) as specified in the NSHP Guidebook, the enforcement agency may waive the plan check and inspection of all measures other than the mandatory measures in the building.
Authority: Section 25402, Public Resources Code. Reference: Section 25402, Public Resources Code.
HISTORY:
1.
Amendment of subsection (e) filed 1-19-84; effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register 84, No. 3).

2.
Amendment filed 12-27 -84; designated effective 1-1-85 pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.2 (d) (Register 84, No. 52).

3.
Editorial correction of subsection (b) filed 2-5-85; effective upon filing pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.2 (d) (Register 85, No.6).

4.
Amendment of subsection (a) filed 12-4-86; effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register 87, No. 1).

5.
(CEC 1/92) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to amend Section 10-103, Part 1, Title 24, California Code ofRegulations. Filed with the secretary ofstate June 12, 1992; publication date July 15, 1992; effective 30 days thereafter. Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on June 8, 1992.

6.
(CEC 2/94) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to amend Section 10-103 (a) 1, 2, 3 and 4; (b) I, 2 and 3; (d) 2, Part I, Title 24, California Code of Regulations. Filed with the secretary of state May 24, 1995; effective 30 days thereafter. Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on May 23, 1995.


10-103-A. Nonresidential lighting controls acceptance test training and certification.
(a)
Scope. The requirements of this section apply to nonresidential lighting control Acceptance Test Technicians and Employers, and the Certification Providers that train and certify them.

(b)
Industry certification threshold. Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Technician and Employer certification requirements shall take effect when the Energy Commission finds that each of the following conditions are met. Until such time that Sections 10-103-A(b)1 and 10-103-A(b)2 are met, Field Technicians are allowed to complete the acceptance test requirements in Section 130.4 without completing the Acceptance Test Technician certification requirements.


1. 	Number of certified acceptance test technicians. There shall be no less than 300 Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Technicians certified to perform the acceptance tests in Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section 130.4. The number of certified Acceptance Test Technicians shall be demonstrated by
2013 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC)
Certification Provider-prepared reports submitted to the Energy Commission.
2. 	Industry coverage by certification provider(s). The Certification Provider(s) approved by the Energy Commission, in their entirety, shall provide reasonable access to certification for technicians representing the majority of the following industry groups: electrical contractors, certified general electricians, professional engineers, controls installation and startup contractors and certified commissioning professionals who have verifiable training, experience and expertise in lighting controls and electrical systems. The Energy Commission will determine whether in their entirety reasonable access to certification is provided by considering factors such as certification costs commensurate with the complexity of the training being provided, certification marketing materials, prequalification criteria, class availability, and curriculum.

(c) Qualifications and approval of certification providers. The Acceptance Test Technician Certification Providers (ATTCPs) shall submit a written application to the Energy Commission with a summary and the related background documents to explain how the following criteria and procedures have been met:
1.
Requirements for Applicant ATTCPs to Document Organizational Structure. ATTCPs shall provide written explanations of the organization type, by-laws, and ownership structure. ATTCPs shall explain in writing how their certification program meets the qualification requirements of Title 24, Part 1, Section 10-103-A( c). ATTCPs shall explain in their application to the Energy Commission how their organizational structure and procedures include independent oversight, quality assurance, supervision and support of the acceptance test training and certification processes.

2.
Requirements for certification of employers. The ATTCPs shall provide written explanations ofhow their program includes certification and oversight of Acceptance Test Employers to ensure quality control and appropriate supervision and support for Acceptance Test Technicians.

3.
Requirements for Applicant ATTCPs to Document Training and Certification Procedures. ATTCPs shall provide a complete copy of all training and testing procedures, manuals, handbooks and materials. ATTCPs shall explain in writing how their training and certification procedures include, but are not limited to, the following:


A. Training scope. Both hands-on experience and theoretical training such that Acceptance Test Technicians demonstrate their ability to apply the Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing and documentation requirements to a comprehensive variety oflighting control systems and networks that are reflective of the range of systems currently encountered in the field. The objective of the hands-on training is to practice and certify competency in the technologies and skills necessary to perform the acceptance tests.
B. Lighting controls acceptance test technician training.
(i) 	Curricula. Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider training curricula for Lighting Control Acceptance Test Technicians shall include, but not be limited to, the analysis, theory, and practical application of the following:
a.  Lamp and ballast systems;
b.  Line voltage switching controls;
c.  Low voltage switching controls;
d.  Dimming controls;
e.  Occupancy sensors;
f.  Photosensors;
g.  Demand responsive signal inputs to light
ing control systems;
h.  Building Energy Efficiency Standards
required lighting control systems;
i.  Building Energy Efficiency Standards
required lighting control system-specific
analytical/problem solving skills;
j.  Integration of mechanical and electrical
systems for Building Energy Efficiency
Standards required lighting control
installation and commissioning;
k.  Safety procedures for low-voltage retro
fits ( < 50 volts) to control line voltage
systems (120 to 480 volts);

1. 	Accurate and effective tuning, calibration, and programming of Building Energy Efficiency Standards required lighting control systems;
m.
Measurement of illuminance according to the Illuminating Engineering Society's measurement procedures as provided in the IESNA Lighting Handbook, 1Oth Edition, 2011, which are incorporated by reference;

n.
Building Energy Efficiency Standards lighting controls acceptance testing procedures; and

o.
Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing compliance documentation for lighting controls.


(ii) Hands-on training. The ATTCP shall describe in their application the design and technical specifications of the laboratory boards, equipment and other elements that will be used to meet the hands-on requirements of the training and certification.
(iii) 	Prequalitication. Participation in the technician certification program shall be limited to persons who have at least three years of verifiable professional experience and expertise in lighting controls and electrical systems as determined by the Lighting Controls ATTCPs, to demonstrate their ability to understand and apply the Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Technician certification training. The criteria and review processes used by the ATTCP to determine the relevance of technician professional experience shall be described in the ATTCP application to the Energy Commission.

(iv)
Instructor to Trainee Ratio. A sufficient ratio of instructors to participants in classroom and laboratory work to ensure integrity and efficacy of the cuniculum and program. The ATTCP shall document in its application to the Energy Commission why its instructor to trainee ratio is sufficient based on industry standards and other relevant information.

(v)
Tests. A written and practical test that demonstrates each certification applicant's competence in all specified subjects. The ATTCPs shall retain all results of these tests for five years from the date of the test.

(vi)
Recertification. Requirements and procedures for recertification of Acceptance Test Technicians each time the Building Energy Efficiency Standards is updated with new and/or modified acceptance test requirements.

C.
Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Employer Training. Training for Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Employers shall consist of a single class or webinar consisting of at least four hours of instruction that covers the scope and process of the acceptance tests in Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section 130.4.

D.
Complaint procedures. The ATTCPs shall describe in their applications to the Energy Commission procedures for accepting and addressing complaints regarding the performance of any certified acceptance test technician or employer, and explain how building departments and the public will be notified of these procedures.

E.
Certification revocation procedures. The ATTCPs shall describe in their applications to the Energy Commission procedures for revoking the certification of Acceptance Test Technicians and Employers based upon poor quality or ineffective work, failure to perform acceptance tests, falsification of documents, failure to comply with the documentation requirements of these regulations or other specified actions that justify decertification.

F.
Quality Assurance and Accountability. The ATTCP shall describe in their application to the Energy Commission how their certification business practices include quality assurance, independent oversight and accountability measures, such as, independent oversight of the certification processes and procedures, visits to building sites where certi



tied technicians are completing acceptance tests, certification process evaluations, building department surveys to determine acceptance testing effectiveness, and expert review of the training cunicula developed for Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section 130.4. Independent oversight may be demonstrated by accreditation under the ISO!IEC 17024 standard.
G. Certification Identification Number and Verification ofATT Certification Status. Upon certification of an ATT, the ATTCP shall issue a unique certification identification number to the ATT. The ATTCP shall maintain an accurate record of the certification status for all ATTs that the ATTCP has certified. The ATTCP shall provide verification of cunent ATT certification status upon request to authorized document Registration Provider personnel or enforcement agency personnel to determine the ATT's eligibility to sign Certificate of Acceptance documentation according to all applicable requirements in Sections 10-103-A, 10-102, 1 0-103(a)4, and the Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
(d)
Requirements for ATTCPs to provide annual reports. The ATTCP shall provide an annual report to the Energy Commission summarizing the certification services provided over the reporting period, including the total number ofAcceptance Test Technicians and Employers certified by the ATTCP (a) during the reporting period and (b) to date. The ATTCP shall report to the Energy Commission what adjustments have been made to the training curricula, if any, to address changes to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards Acceptance Testing requirements, adopted updates to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards or to ensure training is reflective of the variety of lighting controls that are cunently encountered in the field, no less than six months prior to the effective date of any newly adopted, or amendment to existing, Building Energy Efficiency Standards. All required reports shall contain a signed certification that the ATTCP has met all requirements for this program.

(e)
Interim Approval of Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider. The California Advanced Lighting Controls Training Program (CALCTP) shall be approved as an authorized Lighting Controls Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider subject to the following conditions:


1.
Interim approval shall be conditioned upon submittal of an application that contains the information required by subdivision (c)(1)-(3), including documentation demonstrating that the certification includes training and testing on the Building Energy Efficiency Standards lighting control acceptance testing procedures and the Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing compliance documentation for lighting control systems.

2.
Technicians who have been certified by CALCTP prior to the inclusion of training on the Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing procedures and compliance documentation shall qualify as Lighting


2013 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC)
Control Acceptance Test Technicians upon successful completion of a class or webinar consisting of at least four hours of instruction on the Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing procedures and compliance documentation.
3.
Employers who have been certified by CALCTP prior to the inclusion of training on the Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing procedures and compliance documentation shall qualify as a Lighting Control Acceptance Test Employer upon successful completion of a class or webinar consisting of at least four hours of instruction on the Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing procedures and compliance documentation.

4.
Interim approval for all ATTCPs shall end on the later date of, July 1, 2014, or six months after the effective date of the 2013 California Building Energy Efficiency Standards. The Energy Commission may extend the interim approval period for up to six additional months total, if it determines the threshold requirements in Section 10-103-A(b) have not been met for the certification requirements to take effect. Ifthe Energy Commission determines that an extension is necessary, its determination shall be approved at a publicly-noticed meeting.

5.
During the interim approval period, including any possible extensions to this interim period, the Energy Commission may approve additional ATTCP providers meeting the requirements of 10-103-A(c).



(f) Application review and determination. The Energy Commission shall review Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider applications according to the criteria and procedures in Section 10-103-A( c) to determine if such providers are approved to provide acceptance testing certification services.
1.
Energy Commission staff will review and validate all information received on Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider applications, and determine that the application is complete and contains sufficient information to be approved.

2.
The Executive Director may require that the applicant provide additional information as required by staff to fully evaluate the Provider application. The Executive Director shall provide a copy of its evaluation to interested persons and provide a reasonable opportunity for public comment.

3.
The Executive Director shall issue a written recommendation that the Energy Commission designate the applicant as an authorized Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider or deny the Provider application.

4.
The Energy Commission shall make a final decision on the application at a publicly-noticed hearing.



(g) Review by the Energy Commission. If the Energy Commission determines there is a violation of these regulations or that an Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider is no longer providing adequate certification services, the .Energy Commission may revoke the authorization of the Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider pursuant to Section 1230 et. seq. ofTitle 20 ofthe California Code ofRegulations.
Authority: Sections 25402, 25402.1, 25213, Public Resources Code. References: Sections 25007, 25402(a)-(b), 25402.1, 25402.4, 25402.5, 25402.8 and 25910, Public Resources Code.
10-103-B. Nonresidential mechanical acceptance test training and certification.
(a)
Scope. The requirements of this section apply to nonresidential mechanical Acceptance Test Technicians and Employers and the Certification Providers that train and certify them.

(b)
Industry Certification Threshold. Mechanical Acceptance Test Technician and Employer certification requirements shall take effect when the Energy Commission finds that each of the following conditions are met. Until such time that Sections 10-103-B(b)1 and 10-103-B(b)2 are met, Field Technicians are allowed to complete the acceptance test requirements in Section 120.5 without completing the Acceptance Test Technician certification requirements.


1. 	Number of Certified Acceptance Test Technicians.
A. There shall be no less than 300 Mechanical Acceptance Test Technicians certified to perform all of the acceptance tests in Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section 120.5, except as provided in Subsection 10-103-B(b)l.B. The number of certified Mechanical Acceptance Test Technicians shall be demonstrated by Certification Provider-provided reports submitted to the Energy Commission.
B. If there are less than 300 Mechanical Acceptance Test Technicians certified to perform all of the acceptance tests in Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section 120.5, then there shall be at least 300 Mechanical Acceptance Test Technicians certified to complete the following tests:
(i)
NA7.5.1 Outdoor Air Ventilation Systems

(ii)
NA7.5.2 Constant Volume, Single Zone Unitary Air Conditioners and Heat Pumps


(iii) NA7.5.4 Air Economizer Controls
(iv)
NA 7 .5.5 Demand Control Ventilation Systems

(
v) NA 7.5 .6 Supply Fan Variable Flow Controls

(vi)
NA7.5.7,NA7.5.9HydronicSystem Variable Flow Controls


(vii)NA7.5.10 Automatic Demand Shed Controls
The number of certified Mechanical Acceptance Test Technicians shall be demonstrated by Certification Provider-provided reports submitted to the Energy Commission.

2. 	Industry coverage by certification provider(s). The Mechanical Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider(s) approved by the Energy Commission, in their entirety, provide reasonable access to certification for technicians representing the majority of the following industry groups: professional engineers, HVAC installers, mechanical contractors, Testing and Balancing (TAR) certitiecl technicians, controls installation and startup contractors and certified commissioning professionals who have verifiable training, experience and expertise in HVAC systems. The Energy Commission will determine reasonable access by considering factors such as certification costs commensurate with the complexity of the training being provided, certification marketing materials, prequalification criteria, class availability and curriculum.
(c) Qualifications and approval of certification providers. The Acceptance Test Technician Certification Providers (ATTCPs) shall submit a written application to the Energy Commission with a summary and the necessary background documents to explain how the following criteria and procedures have been met:
1.
Requirements for Applicant ATTCPs to Document Organizational Structure. ATTCPs shall provide written explanations of the organization type, by-laws, and ownership structure. ATTCPs shall explain in writing how their certification program meets the qualifications of Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section 10-103-B(c). ATTCPs shall explain in their application to the Energy Commission how their organizational structure and procedures include independent oversight, quality assurance, supervision and support of the acceptance test training and certification processes.

2.
Requirement for Certification of Employers. The ATTCPs shall provide written explanations ofhow their program includes certification and oversight of Acceptance Test Employers to ensure quality control and appropriate supervision and support for Acceptance Test Technicians.

3.
Requirements for Applicant ATTCPs to Document Training and Certification Procedures. ATTCPs shall provide a complete copy of all training and testing procedures, manuals, handbooks and materials. ATTCPs shall explain in writing how their training and certification procedures include, but are not limited to, the following:


A. Both hands-on experience and theoretical training such that Acceptance Test Technicians demonstrate their ability to apply the Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing and documentation requirements to a comprehensive variety of mechanical systems and controls that is reflective of the range ofsystems currently encountered in the field.
B. Mechanical Acceptance Test Technician Training.
(i) Curricula: Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider training curricula for Mechanical Acceptance Test Technicians shall include, but not be limited to, the analysis, theory, and practical application of the following:
a) 	Constant volume system controls;
b) 	Variable volume system controls;
c) 	Air-side economizers;
d) 	Air distribution system leakage;
e) 	Demand controlled ventilation with C02 sensors;
f) 	Demand controlled ventilation with occupancy sensors;
g) 	Automatic demand shed controls;
h) 	Hydronic valve leakage;
i) 	Hydronic system variable flow controls;
j) 	Supply air temperature reset controls;
k) 	Condenser water temperature reset controls;
1) 	Outdoor air ventilation systems;
m) Supply fan variable flow controls;
n) 	Boiler and chiller isolation controls;
o) 	Fault detection and diagnostics for packaged direct-expansion units;
p) 	Automatic fault detection and diagnostics for air handling units and zone terminal units;
q) 	Distributed energy storage direct-expansion air conditioning systems;
r) 	Thermal energy storage systems;
s) 	Building Energy Efficiency Standards mechanical acceptance testing procedures; and
t) 	Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing compliance documentation for mechanical systems.

(ii) Hands-on training. The ATTCP shall describe in their application the design and technical specifications of the laboratory boards, equipment and other elements that will be used to meet the hands-on requirements of the training and certification.
(iii) Prequalification. Participation in the technician certification program shall be limited to persons who have at least three years of verifiable professional experience and expertise in mechanical controls and systems as determined by the Mechanical ATTCPs to demonstrate an ability to understand and apply the Mechanical Acceptance Test Technician certification training. The criteria and review processes used by the ATTCP to determine the relevance of technician professional experience shall be described in the ATTCP application to the Energy Commission.
(iv)
Instructor to Trainee Ratio. A sufficient ratio of instructors to participants in classroom and laboratory work to ensure integrity and efficacy of the curriculum and program. The ATTCP shall document in its application to the Energy Commission why its instructor to trainee ratio is sufficient based on industry standards and other relevant information.

(v)
Tests. A written and practical test that demonstrates each certification applicant's competence in all specified subjects. The ATTCPs shall


2013 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC)
retain all results of these tests for five years from the date of the test.
(vi)
Recertification. Requirements and procedures for recertification of Acceptance Test Technicians each time the Building Energy Efficiency Standards is updated with new and/or modified acceptance test requirements. Recertification requirements and procedures shall only apply to those specific elements that are new and/or modified in future updates to Building Energy Efficiency Standards.

C.
Mechanical Acceptance Test Employer Training. Training for Mechanical Acceptance Test Employers shall consist of a single class or webinar consisting of at least four hours of instruction that covers the scope and process of the acceptance tests in Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section

D.
Complaint procedures. Procedures described in writing for notifying building departments and the public that the Acceptance Test Certification Provider will accept complaints regarding the performance of any certified acceptance test technician or employer, and procedures for how the Provider will address these complaints.

E.
Certification Revocation Procedures. Procedures described in writing for revoking the certification of Acceptance Test Technicians and Employers based upon poor quality or ineffective work, failure to perform acceptance tests, falsification of documents, failure to comply with the documentation requirements of these regulations or other specified actions that justify decertification.

F.
Quality Assurance and Accountability. The ATTCPs shall describe in their applications to the Energy Commission how their certification business practices include quality assurance, independent oversight and accountability measures such as independent oversight of the certification processes and procedures, visits to building sites where certified technicians are completing acceptance tests, certification process evaluations, building department surveys to determine acceptance testing effectiveness, and expert review ofthe training curricula developed for Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section


120.5.
120.5. Independent oversight may be demonstrated by accreditation under the ISO!IEC 17024 standard.
G. Certification Identification Number and Verification ofATT Certification Status. Upon certification of an ATT, the ATTCP shall issue a unique certification identification number to the ATT. The ATTCP shall maintain an accurate record of the certification status for all ATTs that the ATTCP has certified. The ATTCP shall provide verification of current ATT certification statu~ upon request to authorized document Registration Provider personnel or enforcement agency personnel to determine the ATT's eligibility to sign Certificate of Acceptance documentation according to all applicable
requirements in Sections 10-103-B, 10-102,
10-103(a)4, and Reference Joint Appendix JA7.

(d)
Requirements for ATTCPs to Provide Annual Reports. The ATTCP shall provide an annual report to the Energy Commission summarizing the certification services provided over the reporting period, including the total number of Acceptance Test Technicians and Employers certified by the agency (a) during the reporting period and (b) to date. The ATTCP shall report to the Energy Commission what adjustments have been made to the training curricula, if any, to address changes to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards Acceptance Testing requirements, adopted updates to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards or to ensure training is reflective of the variety of lighting controls that are currently encountered in the field, no less than six months prior to the effective date of any newly adopted, or amendment to existing Building Energy Efficiency Standards. All required reports shall contain a signed certification that the ATTCP has met all requirements for this program.

(e)
Interim Approval of Mechanical Acceptance Test Technician Certification Providers. The Associated Air Balance Council (AABC), National Environmental Balancing Bureau (NEBB), and the Testing Adjusting and Balancing Bureau (TABB) shall be conditionally approved as authorized Mechanical Acceptance Test Technician Certification Providers, each separately subject to the following conditions:


1. 	Interim approval shall only apply to Mechanical Acceptance Test Technicians completing the following mechanical acceptance tests required in Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section 120.5. Mechanical Acceptance Test Technicians certified by one of the above organizations do not have interim approval to complete all other mechanical acceptance tests in Building Energy Efficiency Standards, Section 120.5.
A. NA7.5.1 Outdoor Air Ventilation Systems
B. NA7.5.2 Constant Volume, Single Zone Unitary Air Conditioners and Heat Pumps
C. NA7.5.4 Air Economizer Controls
D. NA7.5.5 Demand Control Ventilation Systems
E. NA7.5.6 Supply Fan Variable Flow Controls
F. 	NA7.5.7, NA7.5.9 Hydronic System Variable Flow Controls
G. NA7.5.10 Automatic Demand Shed Controls

2. 	Interim approval shall be conditioned upon submittal of an application that contains the information required by subdivision ( c )(1)-(3), including documentation demonstrating that the certification includes training and testing on the Building Energy Efficiency Standards mechanical acceptance testing procedures and the Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing compliance documentation for mechanical systems.
:1. 	Technicians who have been certified by AABC, NEBB, or TABB prior to the inclusion of training on the Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing procedures and compliance documentation shall qualify as Mechanical Acceptance Test Technicians upon successful completion of a class or webinar on the Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing procedures and compliance documentation.
4.
Employers who have been certified by AABC, NEBB, or TABB prior to the inclusion of training on the Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing procedures and compliance documentation shall qualify as a Mechanical Acceptance Test Employer upon successful completion of a class or webinar consisting of at least four hours of instruction on the Building Energy Efficiency Standards acceptance testing procedures and compliance documentation.

5.
Interim approval for all ATTCPs shall end on the later date of July 1, 2014, or six months after the effective date of the 2013 California Building Energy Efficiency Standards. The Energy Commission may extend the interim approval period for up to six additional months total, if it determines the threshold requirements in Section 10-103-B(b) have not been met for the certification requirements to take effect. Ifthe Energy Commission determines that an extension is necessary, its determination shall be approved at a publicly-noticed meeting.

6.
During the interim approval period, including any possible extensions to this interim period, the Energy Commission may approve additional ATTCP providers meeting the requirements of Section 10-103-B(c).


(f) Application Review and Determination. The Energy Commission shall review Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider applications according to the criteria and procedures in Section 10-103-B( c) to determine if such providers are approved to provide acceptance testing certification services.
1.
Energy Commission staff will review and validate all information received on Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider applications, and determine that the application is complete and contains sufficient information to be approved.

2.
The Executive Director may require that the applicant provide additional information as required by staff to fully evaluate the Provider application. The Executive Director shall provide a copy of its evaluation to interested persons and provide an opportunity for public comment.

3.
The Executive Director shall issue a written recommendation that the Energy Commission designate the applicant as an authorized Mechanical Acceptance Tester Certification Provider or deny the Provider application.

4.
The Energy Commission shall make a final decision on the application at a publicly-noticed hearing.


(g) Review by the Energy Commission. Ifthe Energy Commission determines there is a violation of these regulations or that an Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider is no longer providing adequate certification services, the Energy Commission may revoke the authorization of the Acceptance Test Technician Certification Provider pursuant to Section 1230 et. seq. of Title 20 of the California Code of Regulations.
Authority: Sections 25402,25402.1, 25213, Public Resources Code. Reference: Sections 25007, 25402(a)-(b ), 25402.1, 25402.4,25402.5,25402.8 and 25910, Public Resources Code.
10-104. Exceptional designs.
Note: See Section 10-109 for approval of calculation methods and Alternative Component Packages.
(a) Requirements. If a building permit applicant proposes to use a performance compliance approach, and the building designs cannot be adequately modeled by an approved calculation method, an applicant shall be granted a building permit if the Commission finds:
1.
That the design cannot be adequately modeled with an approved calculation method;

2.
Using 	an alternative evaluation technique, that the design complies with Part 6; and

3.
That the enforcement agency has determined that the design complies with all other legal requirements.


(b) Applications. The applicant shall submit four copies ofa signed application with the following materials to the Executive Director:
1.
A copy of the plans and documentation required by II Section 10-103(a)2;

2.
A statement explaining why meeting the energy budget cannot be demonstrated using an approved calculation method;

3.
Documentation from the enforcement agency stating that:


A 	Meeting the energy budget requirements cannot be demonstrated using an approved calculation method; and
B. The design complies with all other legal requirements; and
4. A detailed evaluation of the energy consumption of the proposed building and the building's materials, components, and manufactured devices proposed to be installed to meet the requirements of Part 6 using an II alternative evaluation technique. The evaluation shall include a copy of the technique, instructions for its use, a list of all input data, and all other information required to replicate the results.
Authority: Sections 25402 and 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Sections 25402 and 25402.1, Public Resources Code. HISTORY:
1.
New section filed 12-27 -84; designated effective 1-1-85 pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.2 (d) (Register 84, No. 52).

2.
(CEC 1/92) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to amend Section 10-104, Part I, Title 24, California Code of Regulations. Filed with the secretary ofstate June 12, 1992; publication date July 15, 1992; effective 30 days thereafter. Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on June 8, 1992.


10-105. Enforcement by the Commission.
(a) Where there is no local enforcement agency. Before new construction may begin in an area where there is no local enforcement agency, the Executive Director shall determine in writing that the building design conforms to the requirements of Part 6. The person proposing to construct the building shall submit the information described in Sections 10-103(a)l and 10-103(a)2 to the Executive Director when such a determination is sought.
2013 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC)
(b)
Where building construction is under the jurisdiction of a state agency. Pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 25402.1(g)(5), no construction of any state building shall commence until the Department of General Services or the state agency that otherwise has jurisdiction over the property determines that the construction is designed to comply with the requirements of Part 6 and confirms that the documentation requirements of Sections 10-103(a)l and 10-103(a)2 have been met, and that the plans indicate the features and performance specifications needed to comply with Part 6. The responsible state agency shall notify the Commission's Executive Director of its determination.

(c)
Where the enforcement agency fails to enforce. If an enforcement agency fails to enforce the requirements of thisII article or of Part 6 the Commission, after furnishing 10 days written notice, may condition building permit issuance on submission of the information described in Sections 10-103(a)l


II and 10-103(a)2 to the Executive Director and on his or her written determination that proposed construction conforms to the requirements of Part 6.
Authority: Code Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code.
Reference: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code.
HISTORY:
1.
Amendment filed 12-27-84; designated effective 1-1-85 pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.2 (d) (Register 84, No. 52).

2.
(CEC 1192) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to amend Section 10-105, Part 1, Title 24, California Code ofRegulations. Filed with the secretary ofstate June 12, 1992; publication date July 15, 1992; effective 30 days thereafter. Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on June 8, 1992.



10-106. Locally adopted energy standards.
II
(a) Requirements. Local governmental agencies may adopt and enforce energy standards for newly constructed buildings, additions, alterations, and repairs to existing buildings provided the Energy Commission finds that the standards will require buildings to be designed to consume no more energy
>II than permitted by Title 24, Part 6.
(b) Documentation application. Local governmental agencies wishing to enforce locally adopted energy standards shall submit an application with the following materials to the Executive Director:
1.
The proposed energy standards.

2.
The local governmental agency's findings and supporting analyses on the energy savings and cost effectiveness of the proposed energy standards.

3.
A 	statement or finding by the local governmental agency that the local energy standards will require buildings to be designed to consume no more energy than permitted by Part 6. A statement or finding by the local governmental agency that the local energy standards will require buildings to be designed to consume no more energy than permitted by Part 6.

4.
Any findings, determinations, declarations or reports, including any negative declaration or environmental impact report, required pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, Pub. Resources Code Section 21000 et. seq.



HISTORY:
1.
Amendment filed 12-27-84; designated effective 1-1-85 pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.2 (d) (Register 84, No. 52).

2.
(CEC 1192) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to amend Section 10-106, Part 1, Title 24, California Code ofRegulations. Filed with the secretary ofstate June 12, 1992; publication date July 15, 1992; effective 30 days thereafter. Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on June 8, 1992.


10-107. Interpretations.
(a)
The Commission may make a written determination as to the applicability or interpretation of any provision of this article or ofPart 6 upon written application, ifa dispute concerning II a provision arises between an applicant for a building permit and the enforcement agency, and the dispute has been heard by the local board of permit appeals or other highest local review body. Notice of any such appeal, including a summary of the dispute and the section ofthe regulations involved, shall ifpossible be sent to the Commission by the enforcing agency 15 days before the appeal is heard, and the result of the appeal shall be sent to the Commission within 15 days after the decision is made. Either party to the dispute may apply for a determination but shall concurrently deliver a copy of the application to the other party. The determinations are binding on the parties.

(b)
The Executive Director may, upon request, give written advice concerning the meaning of any provision of this article or of Part 6. Such advice is not binding on any person.


Authority: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. HISTORY:
1.
Amendment filed 12-27-84; designated effective 1-1-85 pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.2 (d) (Register 84, No. 52).

2.
(CEC 1192) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to amend Section 10-107, Part 1, Title 24, California Code ofRegulations. Filed with the secretary ofstate June 12, 1992; publication date July 15, 1992; effective 30 days thereafter. Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on June 8, 1992.


10-108. Exemption.
(a) Requirements. The Commission may exempt any building from any provision of Part 6 if it finds that:
1.
Substantial funds had been expended in good faith on planning, designing, architecture or engineering of the building before the adoption date of the provision.

2.
Compliance with the requirements of the provision would be impossible without both substantial delays and substantial increases in costs of construction above the reasonable costs ofthe measures required to comply with the provision.


(b) Application. The applicant shall submit four copies of a signed application with the following materials to the Executive Director:
1.
A summary of the claimant's contracts for the project;

2.
A summary ofinternal financial reports on the project;

3.
Dated schedules of design activities; and

4.
A progress report on project completion. Authority: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Section 25402.1, Pubhc l<.esources Code.


HISTORY:
Authority: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. 1. Amendment filed 8-11-83; effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register I I Reference: Section 21080.4,21153, 23402.1, Public Resources Code. 83, No. 33).
2.
Amendment filed 12-27-84; designated effective 1-1-85 pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.2 (d) (Register 84, No. 52).

3.
(CEC 1/92) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to amend Section 10-108, Part I, Title 24, California Code of Regulations. Filed with the secretary of state June 12, 1992; publication date July 15, 1992; effective 30 days thereafter. Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on June 8, 1992.


10-109. Compliance software, alternative component pack
ages, exceptional methods, data registries and related data
input software, and electronic document repositories.
>
(a)
Compliance software, alternative component packages, exceptional methods, data registries and related data input software, or electronic document repositories must be approved by the Commission in order to be used to demonstrate compliance with Part 6.

(b)
Application. Applications for approval of compliance software, alternative component packages, exceptional methods, data registries and related data input software must be made as follows:


1.
An applicant shall submit four copies of a signed application form specified by the Executive Director.

2.
The application shall include the following materials:


A. 	A description of the functional or analytical capabilities of the compliance software, alternative component package, calculation method, exceptional method, data registry or related data input software; and
B. 	A demonstration that the criteria in Section 10-109 are met; and
C. 	An initial fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000). The total fee shall cover the Commission's cost of reviewing and analyzing the application. Within 75 days of receipt of an application, the Commission will provide an estimate of the total maximum cost to review and analyze the application and make a determination as to the completeness of the application. Consideration of the application will be delayed until the applicant submits requested additional information. After the Commission determines the total cost, if the cost exceeds the initial fee, the Commission shall assess an additional fee to cover the total cost. Ifthe actual cost is less than the initial, or any estimated maximum, fee the Commission shall refund the difference to the applicant.

(c) Compliance software.
1. 	Public domain computer programs. In addition to the public domain computer programs that are approved pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 25402.1, the Commission may, upon written application or its own motion, approve additional public domain computer programs that may be used to demonstrate that proposed building designs meet energy budgets.
A. The Commission shall ensure that users' manuals or guides for each approved program are available.
B. The Commission shall approve a program only if it predicts energy consumption substantially equivalent to that predicted by the above-referenced public domain computer program, when it models building designs or features.

2. 	Alternative calculation methods (all occupancies).
The Commission may approve non-public domain computer programs as an alternative calculation method, that building permit applicants may then use to
demonstrate compliance with the performance standards (energy budgets) in Part 6. In addition to the application requirements of subdivision (b) above, an application for approval of compliance software must include documentation demonstrating, that the compliance software meets the requirements, specifications, and criteria set forth in the Residential or Nonresidential ACM Approval Manual, as appropriate.
<

NOTE: Copies of the ACM Approval Manuals may be obtained from the Commission's website at: www.energy.ca.gov/title24.
(d) Alternative component packages. In addition to the application requirements of subdivision (b) above, an application for approval of an alternative component package must include documentation that demonstrates that the package:
1.
Will meet the applicable energy budgets, and

2.
Is likely to apply to a significant percentage of newly constructed buildings or to a significant segment of the building construction and design community


(e) Exceptional methods. The Commission may approve an exceptional method that analyzes a design, material, or device that cannot be adequately modeled using the public domain
computer programs. Applications for approval of exceptional methods shall include all information needed to verify the method's accuracy.
(f) Commission action. The Commission may take the following actions on an application submitted pursuant to this section:
1.
Approve the application unconditionally,

2.
Restrict approval to specified occupancies, designs, materials, or devices, or

3.
Reject the application.


(g) Resubmittal. An applicant may resubmit a rejected application or may request modification of a restricted approval. Such application shall include the information required pursuant to this section, and, if applicable, shall indicate how the proposed compliance software, alternative component package, exceptional method, data registry or related data input software has been changed to enhance its accuracy or capabilities, if applicable.
1.
Modification. Whenever an approved compliance software, alternative component package, exceptional method, data registry or related data input software is changed in any way, it must be resubmitted under this section for approval.

2.
The Commission may modify or withdraw approval of compliance software, an alternative component package, an exceptional method, or a data registry or related data input software based on its approval of other programs, methods, registries or data input software that are more suitable.


2013 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC)
(h) Data registries and related data input software, and electronic document repositories.
1. 	Data Registries and Related Data Input Software. Data registries and related data input software shall
conform to the requirements specified in Reference Joint Appendix JA7.
A. The Commission may approve residential data registries that provide for registration, when required by Part 6 of all residential compliance documentation and the nonresidential Certificates of Verification.
B. The Commission may approve nonresidential data registries that provide for registration, when required by Part 6 of all nonresidential compliance documentation. However, nonresidential data registries may not provide for registration of nonresidential Certificates of Verification.
C. The Commission may approve software used for data input to various data registries for registering, when required by Part 6 residential or nonresidential compliance documentation.
2. 	Electronic document repositories.
A. The Commission may approve electronic document repositories that retain for the Commission electronic compliance documentation generated by residential and nonresidential data registries when registration is required by Part 6.

Authority: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. HISTORY:
1.
New section filed 12-9-81; designated effective 1-15-82 (Register 81, No. 50).

2.
Amendment filed 8-11-83; effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register 83, No. 33).

3.
Amendment filed 12-27-84; designated effective 1-1-85 pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.2 (d) (Register 84, No. 52).

4.
Amendment of subsections (b), (d) and (e) filed 12-4-86; effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register 87, No. 1).

5.
Change without regulatory effect of subsection (d) filed 4-5-88; operative 5-5-88 (Register 88, No. 17).

6.
Amendment ofsubsections (b) and (d) filed 1-20-89; operative 2-19-89 (Register 89, No.4).

7.
(CEC 1/92) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to amend Section 10-109, Part 1, Title 24, California Code ofRegulations. Filed with the secretary ofstate June 12, 1992; publication date July 15, 1992; effective 30 days thereafter. Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on June 8, 1992.



10-110. Procedures for consideration ofapplications under Sections 10-104, 10-106, 10-108 and 10-109.
(a)
Within 75 days ofreceipt ofan application, the Executive Director shall determine if the application is complete with all the supporting information required pursuant to Sections 10-104, 10-106, 10-108, or 10-109 (the complete application package). Ifthe application is complete, the Executive Director shall make the complete application package available to interested parties. Comments from interested parties must be submitted within 60 days after being made available.

(b)
Within 7 5 days of the date the application is determined to be complete, the Executive Director may request any additional information needed to evaluate the application. Consid


eration of the application will be delayed until the applicant
submits the requested additional information.
(c)
Within 75 days of receipt of the date the application is determined to be complete, the Executive Director may convene a workshop to gather additional information from the applicant and other interested parties. Interested parties will have 15 days after the workshop to submit additional information regarding the application.

(d)
Within 90 days of the date the application is determined II to be complete, or within 30 days after receipt of complete additional information requested under Section 10-11 O(b) or within 60 days after the receipt of additional information submitted by interested parties under Section 10-11 0( c), whichever is later, the Executive Director shall submit to the Commission a written recommendation on the application.

(e)
The complete application package, any additional infor-II mation considered by the Executive Director, and the Executive Director's recommendation shall be placed on the consent calendar and considered at the next business meeting after submission of the recommendation. The matter may be removed from the consent calendar at the request of any person.

(f)
The Executive Director may charge a fee to recover the costs ofprocessing and reviewing applications, with the excep-II tion of Section 10-106 applications.

(g)
All applicants have the burden of proof to establish that their applications should be granted.


Authority: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code.
Reference: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. HISTORY:
1.
New section filed 12-9-81; designated effective 1-15-82 (Register 81, No. 50).

2.
Amendment filed 12-27-84; designated effective 1-1-85 pursuant to Government Code Section 11346.2 (d) (Register 84, No. 52).

3.
Amendment filed 12-4-86; effective thirtieth day thereafter (Register 87, No.1).


10-111. Certification and labeling of fenestration product U-factors, solar heat gain coefficients and air leakage. This section establishes rules for implementing labeling and certification requirements relating to U-factors, solar heat gain coef-II ficients (SHGCs), visible transmittance (VT), and air leakage for fenestration products under Section 110.6(a) ofPart 6. This section also provides for designation of the National Fenestration Rating Council (NFRC) as the supervisory entity responsible for administering the state's certification program for fenestration products, provided NFRC meets specified criteria.
(a) Labeling requirements.
1. 	Temporary labels.
A. Every manufactured fenestration product shall have
attached to it a clearly visible temporary label that lists the U-factor, the solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC) and Visible Transmittance (VT) and that certifies compliance with the air leakage requirements of Section 110.6(a)l. For the Component Modeling Approach (CMA), site-built fenestration products shall have a label certificate that lists the U-factor, the Solar Heat Gain Coefficient (SHGC), and the Visible Transmittance (VT).

B. U-factor, SHGC and VT shall be determined by either:
i. 	Fenestration products rated and certified using NFRC 100, NFRC 200, NFRC 202, NFRC 203

II
or NFRC 400 Rating Procedures. The manufacturer shall stipulate that the ratings were determined in accordance with applicable NFRC procedures. For manufactured fenestration products, a temporary label certificate approved by the supervisory entity (NFRC) meets theII requirements of this section. For component modeling and site-built fenestration products, a label certificate approved by the supervisory entity (NFRC) meets the requirements of this section.
ii. 	For manufactured or site-built fenestration products not rated by NFRC, a temporary label with the words "CEC Default U-factor," followed by the appropriate default U-factor speci

II 	fied in Section 110.6(a)2 and with the words "CEC Default SHGC," followed by the appropriate default SHGC specified in Section 110.6(a)3 and with the words "CEC Default VT," followed by the appropriate VT as specified in Section 110.6(a)4, meets the requirements of this Subsection B.
II
II C. Temporary labels shall also certify that the product complies with the air leakage requirements of Section 110.6(a)l of the Standards.
2. 	Permanent labels. NFRC Rated products shall have a permanent label that is either a stand-alone label, an extension or tab of an existing permanent certification label being used by the manufacturer/responsible party, or series of marks or etchings on the product. The per
II
manent label, coupled with observable product characteristics, can be used to trace the product to certification information on file with the supervisory entity or to a directory of certified products, published by the super

II 	visory entity. For CMA and site-built fenestration products, a label certificate approved by the supervisory entity meets the requirements of this section.
Exception to Section 10-111(a): Field-fabricated fenestration products.

(b) Certification requirements.
1. 	Certification to default ratings. The manufacturer shall certify on the Default Label that the product's U-factor, SHGC and VT meets the default criteria in Sections 110.6(a)2, 110.6(a)3 and 110.6(a)4; and
A. A temporary label, affixed to the product, that meets the requirements of Section 10-lll(a)IB meets this requirement.
B. Ifthe product claims the default U-factor for a thermal break product, the manufacturer shall also certify on the label that the product meets the thermal-break product criteria, specified on the default table, on which the default value is based. Placing the terms "Meets Thermal Break Default Criteria" on the default temporary label or default label certificate meets this requirement.

2. Certification to NFRC Rating Procedure. If a prod-II uct's U-factor, SHGC or VT is based on the NFRC Rating Procedure, the U-factor, SHGC or VT shall be certified by the manufacturer according to the procedures of an independent certifying organization approved by the Commission.
A. A temporary label, affixed to the product or label certificate for CMA and site-built fenestration, II meeting the requirements ofSection 10-lll(a) certified by the independent certifying organization complies with this requirement.
B. An "independent certifying organization approved by the Commission" means any organization authorized by the supervisory entity to certify U-factor ratings, Solar Heat Gain Coefficient and Visible
II

Transmittance ratings in accordance with the NFRC Rating Procedure. Ifthe Commission designates the NFRC as the supervisory entity, any independent certification and Inspection Agency (lA) licensed by NFRC shall be deemed to be an "independent certifying organization approved by the Commission."
C. The "supervisory entity" means the National Fenestration Rating Council (NFRC), except as provided II in Section 10-111 (c) 1.
Exception to Section 10-111(b): Field-fabricated fenestration products.

(c) Designation ofsupervisory entity. The National Fenes
tration Rating Council shall be the supervisory entity to administer the certification program relating to U-factors, SHGC, and VT ratings for fenestration products, provided the Commission determines that the NFRC meets the criteria in Section 10-111(d).
1.
The Commission may consider designating a supervisory entity other than NFRC only if the Commission detem1ines that the NFRC cannot meet the criteria in Section 10-111 (d). Such other supervisory entity shall II meet the criteria in Section 10-111 (d) prior to being designated.

2.
The Commission shall periodically review, at least annually, the structure and operations of the supervisory entity to ensure continuing compliance with the II criteria in Section 10-111 (d).


(d) Criteria for supervisory entity.
1. 	Membership in the entity shall be open on a nondiscriminatory basis to any person or organization that has an interest in uniform thermal performance ratings for fenestration products, including, but not limited to, members of the fenestration industry, glazing infill industry, building industry, design professionals, specifiers, utilities, government agencies and public interest organizations. The membership shall be composed of a broad cross section of those interested in uniform thermal performance ratings for fenestration products.
2013 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC)
2.
The governing body of the entity shall reflect a reasonable cross section of the interests represented by the membership.

3.
The entity shall maintain a program of oversight of product manufacturers, laboratories, and independent certifying organizations that ensures uniform application of the NFRC Rating Procedures, labeling and certification, and such other rating procedures for other factors affecting energy performance as the NFRC and the Commission may adopt.

4.
The entity shall require manufacturers and independent certifying organizations within its program to use laboratories accredited by the supervisory entity to perform simulations and tests under the NFRC Rating Procedure or by an NFRC Approved Calculation Entity (ACE) under the Component Modeling Approach (CMA) Product Certification Program (PCP).

5.
The entity shall maintain appropriate guidelines for testing and simulation laboratories, manufacturers and certifying agencies, including requirements for adequate:


A. Possession and calibration of equipment;
B. Education, competence and training of personnel;
C. Quality control;
D. Record keeping and reporting;
E. 	Periodic review (including, but not limited to, blind testing by laboratories; inspections of products; and inspections of laboratories, manufacturing facilities and certifying agencies);
F. 	Challenges to certified ratings; and
G. Guidelines to maintain the integrity of the program, including, but not limited to, provisions to avoid conflicts of interest within the rating and certification process.
6.
The entity shall be a nonprofit organization and shall maintain reasonable, nondiscriminatory fee schedules for the services it provides and shall make its fee schedules, the financial information on which fees are based, and financial statements available to its members for inspection.

7.
The entity shall provide hearing processes that give laboratories, manufacturers and certifying agencies a fair review of decisions that adversely affect them.

8.
The entity shall maintain a certification policy committee whose procedures are designed to avoid conflicts of interest in deciding appeals, resolving disputes and setting policy for the certifying organizations within its program.

9.
The entity shall publish at least annually a directory of products certified and decertified within its program.

10.
The entity itself shall be free from conflict-of-interest ties or to undue influence from any particular fenestration manufacturing interest(s), testing or simulation lab(s), or independent certifying organization(s).

11.
The entity shall provide or authorize the use of labels and label certificates for Component Modeling Approach and site-built fenestration products that can



2013 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
be used to meet the requirements of Sections 110.6(a)2, II 110.6(a)3 and 110.6(a)4, and this section.

12. 	The entity's certification program shall allow for multiple participants in each aspect ofthe program to provide for competition between manufacturers, testing labs, simulation labs, and independent certifying organizations.
(e) Certification for other factors. Nothing in this section shall preclude any entity, whether associated with aU-factor, II SHGC and VT certification program or not, from providing certification services relating to factors other than U-factors, SHGCs and VTs for fenestration products. II
Authority: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. Reference: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. HISTORY:
1.
(CEC/2/92) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to adopt Section 10-111, Part 1, Title 24, California Code of Regulations. Filed with the secretary of state August 10, 1993; effective 30 days thereafter (September 9, 1993). Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on August 2, 1993.

2.
(CEC 2/94) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to amend Section 10-111 (a) 1 B, Part 1, Title 24, CaliforniaCodeofRegulations. Filed with the secretary of state August 24, 1993; effective 30 days thereafter. Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on August 2, 1995.


10-112. Criteria for default tables.
(a) The Commission shall maintain tables of default U-factors and SHGCs for use as an alternative to U-factors and SHGCs derived based on the NFRC Rating Procedure. The default values shall meet the following criteria:
1.
The values shall be derived from simulations of products using the same computer simulation program(s) used in the NFRC Rating Procedure.

2.
The default values shall be set so that they do not provide to any significant number of products a lower U-factor or SHGC than those products would obtain if they were rated using the full NFRC Rating Procedure.


(b) The Commission shall periodically review and revise the default tables as necessary to ensure that the criteria are met.
Authority: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code. HISTORY:
1. 	(CEC/2/92) Regular order by the California Energy Commission to adopt Section 10-112, Part 1, Title 24, California Code of Regulations. Filed with the secretary of state August 10, 1993; effective 30 days thereafter (September 9, 1993). Approved as a regular order by the California Building Standards Commission on August 2, 1993.
10-113. Certification and labeling of roofing product reflectance and emittance. This section establishes rules for implementing labeling and certification requirements relating to reflectance and emittance for roofing products for showing compliance with Sections 140.1, 140.2, 140.3(a)1, II 14l.O(b)2B, 150.1(c)ll, 150.2(b)1H, and 150.2(b)2 of Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 6. This section also provides for designation of the Cool Roof Rating Council (CRRC) as the supervisory entity responsible for administering the state's certification program for roofing products, provided CRRC meets specified criteria.
(a) Labeling requirements. Every roofing product installed in construction to take compliance credit or meet the Prescrip
197

tive requirements for reflectance and emittance under Sections 140.1, 140.2, 140.3(a)1, 14l.O(b)2B, 150.1(c)11, 150.2(b)1H or 150.2(b)2 shall have a clearly visible packaging label that lists the emittance and the initial and 3-year aged solar reflectance, or a CRRC approved accelerated aged solar reflectance, tested in accordance with CRRC-1.
Packaging for liquid-applied roof coatings shall state the product meets the requirements specified in Section 11 0.8(i)4.
II
(b) Certification requirements. Every roofing product installed in construction to take compliance credit or meet the Prescriptive requirements for reflectance and emittance under Sections 140.1, 140.2, 140.3(a)1, 14l.O(b)2B, 150.1(c)11,
150.2(b)1H or 150.2(b)2 shall be certified by CRRC or another
supervisory entity approved by the Commission pursuant to
Section 10-113(c).
(c) Designation of supervisory entity. The Cool Roof Rating Council shall be the supervisory entity to administer the certification program relating to reflectance and emittance ratings for roofing products, provided the Commission deter
11 	mines that the CRRC meets the criteria in Section 10-113(d).
1. The Commission may consider designating a supervisory entity other than CRRC if the Commission determines that the CRRC is not meeting the criteria in II Section 10-113(d). Such other supervisory entity shall
meet the criteria in Section 10-113( d) prior to being designated.
2. 	The Commission shall periodically review, at least annually, the structure and operations of the supervisory entity to ensure continuing compliance with the criteria in Section 10-113(d). The supervisory entity shall provide an annual report to the Commission explaining all of the measures it has taken to comply with the criteria in Section 10-113(d).
(d) Criteria for supervisory entity.
1.
Membership in the entity shall be open on a nondiscriminatory basis to any person or organization that has an interest in uniform performance ratings for roofing products, including, but not limited to, members of the rooting industry, building industry, design professionals, specifiers, utilities, government agencies and public interest organizations. The membership shall be composed of a broad cross section of those interested in uniform thermal performance ratings for roofing products.

2.
The governing body of the entity shall reflect a reasonable cross section of the interests represented by the membership.


II
3. The entity shall maintain a program of oversight of product manufacturers, laboratories and independent certifying organizations that ensures uniform application of the CRRC testing and rating procedures, labeling and certification, and such other rating procedures for other factors that improves the accuracy of proper
ties of roofing products affecting energy performance

4.
The entity shall require manufacturers and independent certifying organizations within its program to use only laboratories accredited by the supervisory entity to perform tests under the CRRC rating procedure.

5.
The entity shall maintain appropriate guidelines for testing laboratories and manufacturers, including requirements for adequate:


A. Possession and calibration of equipment; and II
B. Education, competence, and training of personnel; and
C. Quality control; and
D. Record keeping and reporting; and
E. Periodic review including, but not limited to, blind testing by laboratories; inspections of products; and inspections oflaboratories, and manufacturing facil-II ities; and
F. 	Challenges to certified ratings; and
G. Guidelines to maintain the integrity of the program, including, but not limited to, provisions to avoid conflicts of interest within the rating and certification process.
6.
The entity shall be a nonprofit organization and shall maintain reasonable, nondiscriminatory fee schedules for the services it provides, and shall make its fee schedules, the financial information on which fees are based, and financial statements available to its members for inspection.

7.
The entity shall provide hearing processes that give laboratories, manufacturers and certifying agencies a fair review of decisions that adversely affect them.

8.
The entity shall maintain a certification policy committee whose procedures are designed to avoid conflicts of interest in deciding appeals, resolving disputes and setting policy for the certifying organizations in its program.

9.
The entity shall publish at least annually a directory of products certified and decertified within its program.

10.
The entity itself shall be free from conflict-of-interest ties or to undue influence from any particular roofing product manufacturing interest(s), testing or independent certifying organization(s).

11.
The entity shall provide or authorize the use of labels that can be used to meet the requirements for showing compliance with the requirements of Sections 140.1,


II

140.2, 140.3(a)1, 141.0(b)2B, 150.1(c)ll, 150.2(b)1H and 150.2(b)2, and this section.
12. 	The entity's certification program shall allow for multiple participants in each aspect ofthe program to provide for competition between manufacturers and between testing labs.
Authority: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code.
as the CRRC and the Commission may adopt. Reference: Section 25402.1, Public Resources Code.
2013 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS FOR THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY COMMISSION (CEC)
10-114. Deter mi na tion of out door light ing zones and admin is tra tive rules for use. This sec tion establishes rules for imple menting outdoor light ing zones to show com pliance with Sec tion 140.7 of Title 24, Cali for nia Code of Reg u la tions, Part
6.
(a)
Light ing zones. Exte rior light ing allow ances in Cal i for nia vary by Light ing Zones (LZ).

(b)
Light ing zone char ac ter is tics. Table 10-114-A speci fies the rel a tive ambi ent illumi na tion level and the statewide default location for each light ing zone.

(c)
Amend ing the light ing zone des ig na tion. A local juris dic tion may offi cially adopt changes to the light ing zone des ig na tion of an area by follow ing a pub lic pro cess that allows for for mal pub lic notifi ca tion, review and comment about the pro posed change. The local juris dic tion may determine areas where Lighting Zone 4 is applica ble and may increase or decrease the light ing zones for areas that are in State Default Lighting Zones 1, 2 and 3, as spec i fied in Table 10-114-A.

(d)
Com mis sion noti fi ca tion, amended out door light ing zone des ig na tion. Local juris dic tions who adopt changes to the State Default Light ing Zones shall notify the Com mis sion by pro vid ing the fol low ing mate ri als to the Exec u tive Direc tor:


1. A detailed spec i fi ca tion of the bound aries of the adopted light ing zones, con sist ing of the county name, the city name if any, the zip code(s) of the redesignated areas, and a descrip tion of the phys i cal bound aries within each zip code.

2.
A descrip tion of the pub lic pro cess that was con ducted in adopting the light ing zone changes.

3.
An expla na tion of how the adopted light ing zone changes are consis tent with the spec i fi ca tions of Sec tion 10-114.


The com mission shall have the authority to not allow light ing zone changes which the Com mission finds to be incon sis-tent with the spec i fi ca tions of Section 10-114.
TABLE 10-114-A
LIGHTING ZONE CHARACTERISTICS AND RULES FOR AMENDMENTS BY LOCAL JURISDICTIONS

ZONE  AMBIENT ILLUMINATION  STATEWIDE DEFAULT LOCATION  MOVING UP TO HIGHER ZONES  MOVING DOWN TO LOWER ZONES
LZ1  Dark  Government designated parks, recreation areas and wildlife preserves. Those that are wholly contained within a higher lighting zone may be considered by the local government as part of that lighting zone.  A government designated park, recreation area, wildlife preserve or portions thereof, can be designated as LZ2 or LZ3 if they are contained within such a zone.  Not applicable.
LZ2  Low  Rural areas, as defined by the 2000 U.S. Census.  Special districts within a default LZ2 zone may be designated as LZ3 or LZ4 by a local jurisdiction. Examples include special commercial districts or areas with special security considerations located within a rural area.  Special districts and government designated parks within a default LZ2 zone may be designated as LZ1 by the local jurisdiction for lower illumination standards, without any size limits.
LZ3  Medium  Urban areas, as defined by the 2000 U.S. Census.  Special districts within a default LZ3 may be designated as LZ4 by local jurisdiction for high-intensity nighttime use, such as entertainment or commercial districts or areas with special security considerations requiring very high light levels.  Special districts and government designated parks within a default LZ3 zone may be designated as LZ1 or LZ2 by the local jurisdiction, without any size limits.
LZ4  High  None.  Not applicable.  Not applicable.

BLUE BLUE

